UntitledCONSTRAINT, CONSTRUAL, AND COGNITIVE SCIENCE Robert P.
 Abel son Yale University Cognitive science has barely emerged as a discipline  or an interdiscipline, or whatever it is  and already it is having an identity crisis.
 Within us and among us we have many competing identities.
 Two particular prototypic identities cause a very serious clash, and I would like to explicate this conflict and then explore some areas in which a fusion of identities seems possible.
 Consider the twoword name "cognitive science".
 It represents a hybridization of two different impulses.
 On the one hand, we want to study human and artificial cognition, the structure of mental representatives, the nature of mind.
 On the other hand, we want to be scientific, be principled, be exact.
 These two impulses are not necessarily incompatible, but given free rein they can develop what seems to be a diametric opposition.
 The study of the knowledge in a mental system tends toward both naturalism and phenomenology.
 The mind needs to represent what is out there in the real world, and it needs to manipulate it for particular purposes.
 But the world is messy, and purposes are manifold.
 Models of mind, therefore, can become garrulous and intractable as they become more and more realistic.
 If one's emphasis is on science more than on cognition, however, the canons of hard science dictate a strategy of the isolation of idealized subsystems which can be modeled with elegant productive formalisms.
 Clarity and precision are highly prized, even at the expense of common sense realism.
 To caricature this tendency with a phrase from John Tukey (1959), the motto of the narrow hard scientist is, "Be exactly wrong, rather than approximately right".
 The one tendency points inside the mind, to see what might be there.
 The other points outside the mind, to some formal system which can be logically manipulated (Kintsch et al.
, 1981).
 Neither camp grants the other a legitimate claim on cognitive science.
 One side says, "What you're doing may seem to be science, but it's got nothing to do with cognition.
" The other side says, "What you're doing may seem to be about cognition, but it's got nothing to do with science.
" Superficially, it may seem that the trouble arises primarily because of the twoheaded name cognitive science.
 I well remember the discussions of possible names, even though I never liked "cognitive science", the alternatives were worse; abominations like "epistology" or "representonomy".
 But in any case, the conflict goes far deeper than the name itself.
 Indeed, the stylistic division is the same polarization than arises in all fields of science, as well as in art, in politics, in religion, in child rearing  and in all spheres of human endeavor.
 Psychologist Silvan Tomkins (1965) characterizes this overriding conflict as that between characterologically leftwing and rightwing world views.
 The leftwing personality finds the sources of value and truth to lie within individuals, whose reactions to the world define what is important.
 The rightwing personality asserts that all human behavior is to be understood and judged according to rules or norms which exist independent of human reaction.
 A similar distinction has been made by an unnamed but easily guessable colleague of mine, who claims that the major clashes in human affairs are between the "neats" and the "scruffies".
 The primary concern of the neat is that things should be orderly and predictable while the scruffy seeks the roughandtumble of life as it comes.
 I am exaggerating slightly, but only slightly, in saying that the major disagreements within cognitive science are instantiations of a ubiquitous division between neat rightwing analysis and scruffy leftwing ideation.
 In truth there are some signs of an attempt to fuse or to compromise these two tendencies.
 Indeed, one could view the success of cognitive science as primarily dependent not upon the cooperation of linguistics,AI, psychology, etc.
, but rather, upon the union of clashing world views about the fundamental nature of mentation.
 Hopefully, we can be open minded and realistic about the important contents of thought at the same time we are principled, even elegant, in our characterizations of the forms of thought.
 The fusion task is not easy.
 It is hard to neaten up a scruffy or scruffy up a neat.
 It is difficult to formalize aspects of human thought which are variable, disorderly, and seemingly irrational, or to build tightly principled models of realistic language processing in messy natural domains.
 Writings about cognitive science are beginning to show a recognition of the need for worldview unification, but the signs of strain are clear.
 Consider the following passage from a recent article by Frank Keil (1981) in Pscyhological Review, giving background for a discussion of his formalistic analysis of the concept of constraint: "Constraints will be defined.
.
.
as formal restrictions that limit the class of logically possible knowledge structures that can normally be used in a given cognitive domain.
" (p.
 198).
 Now, what is the word "normally" doing in a statement about logical possibility? Does it mean that something which is logically impossible can be used if conditions are not normal? This seems to require a cognitive hyperspace where the impossible is possible.
 It is not my intention to disparage an author on the basis of a single statement infelicitously put.
 I think he was genuinely trying to come to grips with the reality that there is some boundary somewhere to the penetration of his formal constraint analysis into the viscissitudes of human affairs.
 But I use the example as symptomatic of one kind of approach to the cognitive science fusion problem: you start from a neat, rightwing point of view, but acknowledge some limited role for scruffy, leftwing orientations.
 The other type of approach is the obvious mirror: you start from the disorderly leftwing side and struggle to be neater about what you are doing.
 I prefer the latter approach to the former.
 I will tell you why, and then lay out the beginnings of such an approach.
 The strategy of trying to move leftward from the right suffers from a seemingly permanent limitation on the kinds of content and process you are willing to consider.
 If what really matters to you is the formal tractability of the domain of investigation, then your steps are likely to be small and timid.
 Recent history in several social and behavioral science areas makes this quite clear.
 In cognitive anthropology, there was a great deal of fascination 25 years ago with the orderliness of systems for kinship terminology.
 Kin terms in different societies were found to be precisely describable by concatenations of the values on a handful of wellspecified components such as sex and generation.
 Formal minimodels captured these regularities elegantly.
 Originally it was thought that this kind of componential semantics held great promise for the analysis of culture and language in general, but gradually it was realized that outside of kinship terms and pronoun systems, precious little else in the language of any society was ordered so neatly.
 Faith in tight componential analysis has largely been abandoned.
 Rational decision theory has until recently had a tight hold on the views of economists and some psychologists of the way people made decisions.
 The typical rational decision model specifies a set of uncertain outcomes, with each of which is associated a probability and a utility.
 Choices among ensembles ot outcomes are then said to be predictable on the basis of a strict composition rule on the probabilities and utilities.
 The only trouble is, the behavior of human subjects overwhelmingly disobeys the predictions of the models, no matter how hard the axioms try.
 There have been numerous attempts to rescue the general framework, including the clever strategy of training subjects to obey the rational model following initial demonstrations of deviation from it.
 I would recommend this device also to people promoting competence models of syntax in the face of incompetent performers, except that I cannot as a psychologist bring myself to believe that it tells us anything about human psychology.
 In any case, there are some many violations of rational decision theory that it is a clear failure as a descriptive or explanatory psychological model.
 Only an approach that deals directly with observed decision phenomena (for example, the work of Tversky and Kahneman (1980)) has a chance of success.
 (For fuller reviews of this field, see Einhorn and Hogarth (1981), March (1978), and Abelson & Levi (Note 1)).
 Other examples of excessive faith in the unaided power of formalisms to subdue the beast of psychological explanation could be adduced from within experimental psychology itself.
 A good case from some years back is provided by stochastic learning models (Bush & Mosteller, 1955), which were extremely rich as mathematical objects,but turned out to have applicability to a very small range of problems, indeed.
 Models like this were part of the "bottom up" tradition of doing science within experimental psychology, the belief that by starting with very tightly controlled, limited, and isolated laboratory phenomena, one could gradually explicate the operation of the whole organism.
 This tradition is of course still strongly honored by many experimental pscyhologists, but I think that those psychologists interested in cognitive science have largely departed from that tradition, at least in its most extreme form.
 In the service of studying more important and more general phenomena than those falling within the formal boundaries of minimodels, cognitive science psychologists have been willing to use messier stimulus materials and at least contemplate nonlaboratory methodologies.
 The way is not easy, and there is much anguishing.
 That, I claim, is the price of trying to move leftward from a rightwing starting point.
 Linguists, by and large, are farther away from a cognitive science fusion than are cognitive psychologists.
 The belief that formal semantic analysis will prove central to the study of human cognition suffers from the touching selfdelusion that what is elegant must perforce be true and general.
 Intense study of quantification and truth conditions because they provide a convenient intersection of logic and language will not prove any more generally informative about the huge range of potential uses of language than the anthropological analysis of kinship terms told us about culture and language.
 On top of that, there is the highly restrictive tradition of defining the user of language as a redundant if not defective transducer of the information to be found in the linguistic corpus itself.
 There is no room in this tradition for the human as inventor and changer and social transmitter of linguistic forms, and of contents to which those forms refer.
 To try to understand cognition by a formal analysis of language seems to me like trying to understand baseball by an analysis of the physics of what happens when an idealized bat strikes an idealized baseball.
 One might learn a lot about possible trajectories of the ball, but there is no way in the world one could ever understand what is meant by a double play or a run or an inning, much less the concept of winning the World Series.
 These are human rule systems invented on top of the physical possibilities of the batted ball, just as there are human rule systems invented on top of the structural possibilities of linguistic forms.
 One can never infer the rule systems from a study of the forms alone.
 Well, not I have stated a strong preference against trying to move leftward from the right.
 What about the other? What are the difficulties in starting from the scruffy side and moving toward the neat? The obvious advantage is that one has the option of letting the problem area itself, rather than the available methodology, guide us about what is important.
 The obstacle, of course, is that we may not know how to attack the important problems.
 More likely, we may think we know how to proceed, but other people may find our methods sloppy.
 We may have to face accusations of being £d hoc, and scientifically unprincipled, and other awful things.
 Sometimes we worry about such matters ourselves.
 There is a neat person struggling to get into every scruffy person (just as there is a scruffy person struggling to get out of every neat person).
 What is required is that we act on our worries, that we try to take the criticisms seriously and see what can be done about them.
 The messy intuitions and theories, albeit they concern very general and important problems (God bless 'em), need to be articulatued and developed in a more orderly way.
 I will take the work of the Yale Artificial Intelligence Project, and an particular, the programmatic statements in the Schank and Abelson (1977) book as point of departure.
 The Yale point of view is quintessential1y scruffy, and has been criticized accordingly.
 No matter that scrips and plans and goals and themese are psychologically reasonable, and that computer programs using such concepts are operational at the frontier of realistic processing of natural language, nevertheless, it is said that the system of concepts is not formal enough.
 The make a system more formal is to define its concepts more precisely, and to have them enter into general predictions and explanations according to a set of principles, preferable a small elegant set.
 Let me first address the question of the definition of concepts.
 The Yale group deals with knowledge structures such as scripts and plans, it may seem at first that these are pretty amorphous entities.
 What counts, say, as a script or as clearly not a script? How can you tell? When we gave examples such as the restaurant script, and cognitive psychological experiments (e.
g.
, Bower, Black & Turner, 1979; Galambos & Rips, 1979; Graesser, 1981) forthwith used verbal stimuli from the restaurant situation, along with doctor visits and laundromat activities and so on, it may have produced misleading impressions that the intention was to define scripts solely by waving at passing examples, or perhaps by writing down a definitive list of 111 of them, or worse, by allowing any damn thing to be a script just by calling it that.
 I say that these impressions are misleading because in fact we have become acutely aware (Schank, Note 2) that scripts have been loosely used.
 The original intention was not at all to create a haven for loose concepts; in fact, scripts (among other knowledge structures) were very tightly defined, by a set of interdependent constraints.
 Indeed, if a knowledge structure is proposed as crucial in the topdown processing of certain inputs, then clearly it must embody of us to leave these constraints largely implicit, rather than spelling them out systematically.
 It is not my main intention today to remedy this neglect for scripts or any other specific type of knowledge structure, but rather to make clear my general view of the role that constraints play in the process of understanding text.
 However, having raised the issue, it is useful to begin by indicating what constrains script structures.
 Related remarks apply to related types of structures such as MOPs (Schank, 1980) and metascripts (Abelson, 1981).
 The casual definition of a script is "a stereotyped sequence of events familiar to the individual".
 Implicit in this definition are two powerful sources of constraint.
 One is the notion of an event sequence, which implies the causal chaining of enablements and results for physical events and of initiations and reasons for mental events.
 Causal chains are highly ruleful, and many of those rules have been spelled out explicitly (Schank, 1975; Schank and Abelson, 1977.
 Ch.
2).
 The other constraint generator comes from the ideas of stereotypy and familiarity.
 That an event sequence is stereotyped implies the absence of fortuitous events.
 Also, for events to be often repeated implies that there is some set of standard individual and institutional goals which gives rise to the repetition.
 Furthermore, there are almost certainly subgoals, each of which defines a scene involving a transaction between particular role players in a certain physical setting, using given props.
 At the scene level of a script, therefore, there run in parallel four networks of coherences: Those governing the transactions, the role players, the physical settings, and the props.
 None of these entities can enter into sequences arbitrarily.
 Scene transitions between one physical setting and another, for example, follow the topographical rules of familiar environments.
 One does not step off the airplane directly into a swimming pool, or go from the doctor's waiting room into the kitchen.
 Role players remain from scene to scene except when somebody makes a purposive and expected entry or exit.
 It does not require belaboring these coherences in full detail to realize the enormous degree of constraint thus imposed on input relevant to any given script.
 Perhaps on of the things that disguised the high order of systematicity of scripts was that some of the computer programs that used them, such as SAM (Cullingford, Note 3), were written in a way that did not insure against ad hoc violations of some of the constraints.
 A prankish programmer could perfectly well prepare an expected event sequence wherein the customer ate the check and gave the food to the cashier, thus thwarting their mutual goals, and nothing in the Script Applier would protest illegitimacy of such expectations.
 Of course they would turn out by experience to be useless in matching realistic inputs, but that is a very weak way to recognize absurdity.
 (And it is still vulnerable to the possibility of prankish inputs).
 Later programs such as POLITICS (Carbonell, 1978) did not, by the way, suffer the same degree of vulnerability, but this whole issue has not been treated as explicitly as it might be.
 Why is any of this important? Well, there may be some people who feel it is not important, that there are more compelling issues for language AI to worry about.
 But it bothers me that the concept of structural constraint seems to have been coopted by the neats, when all the while the scruffy Yale programs are based very heavily on a whole series of implicit constraints.
 Let us look more closely at some general issues pertaining to the idea of constraint.
 In the original formulation of information theory and communication theory, the structural constraints on the communicative elements were presumed mutually accessible to the sender and receiver of messages.
 They each knew the redundancies of letter strings or phoneme strings, and this consensus was the basis for an analysis of the information content of messages.
 In effect, one could ignore most of the properties of the receiver, and concentrate the analysis on the properties of the stimulus ensemble.
 Nowadays the emphasis in cognitive science is on chunks of meaning, and one cannot generate meaning simply by higherorder approximations to the structure of lowlevel stimulus elements.
 The idea that the set of possible messages is very much constrained is still a powerful idea, but at least two drastic changes are necessary in applying an information theoretic type of analysis to higherlevel meaning elements, say.
 sentences, rather than to lowlevel stimulus elements such as letters.
 For one thing, the number of possible elements is infinite rather than finite.
 For another, there is no guarantee at all that the receiver of messages adequately comprehends the structure of contingencies between sentences that can possible be generated by the message source.
 People in the Chomskyan tradition writing about constraints in knowledge structures do not usually distinguish between structural constraint intrinsic to the stimulus ensemble and structural contraint characterizing the receiver's construal of the stimulus possibilities.
 The former focuses the analysis structure strictly on analysis of language, completely defining the psychology of the receiver out of independent existence.
 This is a very rightwing attitude, in the sense I have previously discussed.
 People are said to be the way they are because of immutable external regularities.
 There is little interest in studying learning, or human error, or individual differences in intelligence.
 Furthermore, there is total disregard of cultural shaping of knowledge structures.
 That is, even in cases where there is a structural match between the semantics of the language and the corresponding mental representation in a particular domain, this match may have been produced by a process of cultural invention rather than by the inevitable emergence of a natural truth.
 Much social knowledge pertains to what anthropologists (cf.
 D'Andrade, Note 4) call constitutive rule systems, extensive networks of how to construe, how to behave in, and even how to feel about culturally defined situations.
 The nexus of rules defining the meaing of marriage is one example.
 Other examples of cultural rule systems are mental illness, senior citizenship, golf, and sexual harassment.
 It seems to me perfectly obvious that there is no foreordained meaning for any of these domains, or a thousand others, rather, a meaning which evolves under the pressure of social, political and economic motives and experiences.
 I belabor the banal here because of recently renewed claims that to know knowledge, one only need know semantics.
 Having thus gored the onehorned ox, let me try to lay out a balanced view of one aspect of the interplay between mental representatives and stimulus structures.
 I will place the argument in the context of text understanding.
 Consider an individual who is exposed to a string of language, presented one chunk at a time, say, sentence by sentence.
 Considerable constraint will be imposed by the general context surrounding the presentation of the string, say, whether it is a story or a piece of conversation, and what nature of the topic and style of presentation.
 The local context operative at a particular place within the string will exercise further constraint.
 Is there a way to conceptualize a measure of the degree of structuredness at any given place in the presentation of the string? Further, is there a way to think about structure such that it is a joint property of the stimulus string and the interpretive machinery of the understander? I propose a characterization relating the structuredness of a context to the constraint in the stimulus string and something I will call the construal function on the part of the understander.
 The constraint in the stimulus string can be expressed by the distribution of probabilities P(i) of occurrence over all potential next stimulus chunks.
 If a few inputs are moderately likely and all others are of very low probability, the stimulus contains more structure than if likelihood is fairly evenly distributed over a large set of possibilities.
 This is as in standard information theory.
 But the understander may not extract from the stimulus the available structure.
 The individual has expectations of what sorts of things may occur next.
 If something which is highly expected occurs, it is difficult to process.
 In general, we may imagine that there is a distribution of measures of processing facility F(i) over all possible next stimulus chunks.
 Under various different construals of what the stimulus string is about, thus what expectations are appropriate, the distribution of facility measures will be different.
 Perhaps processing facility could be operationalized as the speed with which a given chunk can be comprehended, or perhaps in some more subtle way, but in any case the understander is conceptualized as having the capacity to prepare for coming inputs by making a differential allocation of facility measures F(i).
 This is a much more realistic view of the understander than assuming that he has no expectations at all, thus relatively equal facility in accepting all inputs, or only a single dominant expectation.
 Artificial intelligence programs that work heavily topdown always in effect smear their expectations over a domain of related possibilities.
 A good image for this emaring tendency is Chuck Reiger's concept of the "expectancy cloud".
 The average value of processing facility is the sum of crossproducts of stimulus probability P(i) and facility measure F(i) over all possible input chunks.
 This average facility will be high or low depending on four things: (1) the general simplicity of the context; (2) the general facility of the understander; (these two factors can jointly be characterized by the mean of the F's unweighted by stimulus probability): (3) the degree of predictability inherent in the stimulus string (which could be indexed by an uncertainty measure on the P's); and (4) the match between the F's and the P's that is, the extent to which the construal by the understander appropriately allocates her preparations in the direction of inputs which are relatively likely to occur.
 Under an assumption of a fixed unweighted variance of the F's, it is easy to show that the average proportionality relationship between the P's and the F's, high facility attaching to relatively high likelihood, and low facility attaching to relatively low likelihood.
 The match between what is expected and what might occur should not automatically be presumed, either according to some cosmic principle of innate resonance between the individual and the environment, or on the basis of a gradual learning of, and accomodation to contextual contingencies.
 There are at least four reasons for this.
 First, it is very possible, indeed frequent, for people to misconstrue situations and have a whole series of misguided expectations.
 Misconstrual tendencies are very interesting to social psychologists and there has been a good deal of recent research on stereotyping, on misleading first impressions, on the effects of inappropriate but salient schemata, and on the insensitivity of false constructions to empirical evidence (cf.
 Nisbert & Ross, 1980).
 A second reason not to presume that construals reflect stimulus constraints is that people are generally extremely slow to pick up the contingency structure in novel input materials, if they ever get it at all.
 Contingencies are especially problematic when multidimensional dependencies are involved.
 It is clear from classical twoalternative guessing situations that people are very good at learning the simplest zeroorder structure, that is, the relative frequencies of two'different alternatives.
 Although appropriate data do not to my knowledge exist, there is little reason, however, to suppose that people are adept at learning the zeroorder structure within large numbers of alternatives.
 And it is very clear from socalled "cue validity" studies (e.
g.
,Hammond & Summers, 1965) that there are sharp limitations on the learning of higherorder structures.
 When many independent cues are modest predictors of an outcome variable, people are unable to use all the cues, but settle instead for (somewhat fallible) use of three or four of them.
 In realistic stimulus domains where it is not at all clear how many cues of what sort there might be, the situation can be even worse.
 For example, in studies of how people judge whether someone else is lying or not (Krauss et al.
, 1976; Kraut, 1978), the facial, gestural and speech cues that judges employ to diagnose the liar overlap hardly at all with the set of cues that actually predict lying.
 A third reason, related to the second, is that stimulus structure is usually dependent on the source of the string being communicated.
 Different communicators have different styles and different angles on what to say or write about a given topic.
 The understander usually will not have long enough experience with particular communicators to pick up their individual contingency structures, even if learning were very rapid.
 Fourth, the construal function must be flexible.
 in operation, so that when there is a shift in the topic of the stimulus string, the understander can establish a new set of expectations.
 A lack of matching could come about if adjustments in construal were sluggish, lagging behind the stimulus.
 It is intuitively clear that there are both individual and situational differences in the rate of adjustment of construals.
 Part of the ordinary concept of intelligence, or perhaps quickmindedness, is the ability ot an individual to keep up with what is being read or said, especially if the point is rapidAy shifting.
 Situations, too, may help or hinder quick reconstrual.
 There is a good deal of psychological literature on the phenomenon of perserverance, wherein a person's analysis of a problem area continues in a vein which has previously been successful, despite the introduction of new materials which make the old analysis outmoded (Luchins, 1942), or the presentation of evidence that past success was spurious (Ross, Lepper, & Hubbard, 1975).
 In short, the structure in personal construals need not match the structure of stimulus constraints, for several reasons.
 When there is a match, however, understanding is considerable facilitated.
 The example of script processing provides an especially clear case.
 An account of a highly scripted activity such as a visit to a doctor introduces very high stimulus constraint, because only a limited number of events have high probability of occurrence in the account.
 If the understander construes the account as indeed concerning a doctor visit (as opposed, say, to a chat with a professional colleague), then his relevant knowledge structure will highly constrain his expectations to a small set of events.
 Given a sufficient consensus on what sorts of things transpire in accounts of doctor visits, understanding will (on average) be very facile.
 My discussion to this point has concealed an important aspect of the concepts of constraint and construal in text processing.
 There are really three different types of structural limitation on coherent stimuli and coherent expectations.
 Recall that we are supposing that the input string is received a chunk at a time, and that we are interested in the probability of occurrence and the processing facility associated with every possible chunk.
 For tangibility we may suppose that the chunks are sentences.
 Two somewhat different kinds of constraints are those applying within chunks, and those applying between chunks.
 Let us designate these respectively as combinatorial constraint and sequential constraint.
 A third kind I will call functional equivalence constraint, to which I will return shortly.
 By within chunk, or combinatorial constraint, I refer to tendencies or rules for what linguistic components go with what.
 This would include all of syntax, semantic rules or "selection restrictions" about sensible meaning combinations, such as what actions require animate actors and what attributes are pertinent for what object classes, and also fragments of pragmatic knowledge that tell us what combinations are unlikely in the real world even though semantically possible, such as the Queen using obscenity or coal miners curtsying.
 In this category of constrint, it seems quite likely that rules characterizing stimulus structure would be generally well matched by rules characterizing construals.
 These aspects of constraint are widely appreciated and shared, and the reasons given above in support of mismatch tendencies are least likely to apply.
 By between chunk, or sequential constraint, I mean tendencies for certain cV\unV.
s, to ^QA\Qvt a <̂ \m̂ t\ chunV.
 or sequence o^ c\\unV.
s.
.
 Vtdto a ^o'^wa^ v^^f^^ of viev), one mi<jht sviw^^e tV\at betv^een cVwinVs.
 constraint is just anotVxer t^unA^e o^ 'ie^ect^O'n restrictions.
, or set o^ ruAes.
 a^out v»\\at qoe^ vrtSVn vthat, and t\\us is just AiVe v̂ itVivv cVwiVvV.
 coT\s.
tTa.
\T\t, but operating on larger units.
 In the field of story understanding, the supposition has sometimes been made that a kind of syntax exists linking successive units, and so we have the notion of "story grammars" (cf.
 Rumelhart, 1977; Mandler & Johnson, 1977).
 Story grammars may have some use as rough tools in restricted story domains, but they have I think rightly been criticized (e.
g.
.
 Black & Wilensky, 1979) when they make overly strong claims.
 Stories are simply not grammatical in quite the same sense that sentences are.
 Nor are other bodies of text.
 When a literate reader asserts that a short string of writing within a period at the end is not a sentence, the literate observe will almost always agree.
 But who is to say that a longer string of writing is not a paragraph, or not a story.
 Judgements here are somewhat fuzzy, as we are dealing not with inviolate rules but with general coherence tendencies.
 Pragmatics and stylisties become much more important, and the role of syntax dwindles.
 Construals can more readily be out of synch with stimulus constraints.
 To think otherwise,and to regard sequential constraint as merely an extension of combinatorial constraint, is to fall too much under the thrall of the bottomup, start small, scientific strategy of the neats.
 The third category, that I have called "functional equivalence" constraint, is rather different in nature.
 In the general conception I have sketched of the construal process, there is the clear unrealism of supposing that the organism allocates preparatory provisions among an infinite number of possible stimuli.
 Much more reasonable is the supposition that the understander prepares differentially for different categories of input content, in effect grouping stimuli into equivalence classes according to the functions they serve.
 Within each class, processing facility would be roughyl constraint.
 This is a fairly strong form of subjectively imposed constraint, for it says that suchandsuch stimuli are to be regarded as equivalent, and all processed with ease, whereas suchandsuch other stimuli, constituting another equivalence class, will be processed with less facility, and so on.
 Now there is great opportunity for mismatching, depending on whether the understander does or does not carve the possibilities at different joints than the probability structure of the stimuli would.
 To maintain matching, it would be necessary for every stimulus within an equivalence class to be approximately equally probable.
 The understander, however, may lump possibilities together because they have comparable personal concern or affective significance, not because they are necessarily objectively substitutable.
 These ideas may become clearer if I recapitulate and then amplify the model I am outlining.
 We are supposing an understander exposed to a stimulus string one chunk at a time.
 Strong structural constraints characterize the ensemble of stimulus strings which the given string instantiates, but we do not presuppose that the understander necessarily perfectly appreciates those constraints.
 Instead, the understander, in a construal process, or general expectational policy, imposes constraints of her own.
 Construals are from time to time altered as the stimulus string unfolds, but while in force, each given construal is a processing allocation which determines the particular degree of facility with which different possible inputs and sequences of inputs would be processed.
 A construal defines functional equivalence classes of stimuli, such that stimulus possibilities within class are processed alike.
 The average facility of processing is maximized when there is a match between the probability structure of the stimulus ensemble and the facility structure of the construal.
 Furthermore, given some degree of match, the average facility increases with increasing structuredness.
 There are really three aspects of both types of structure: the zeroorder structure partitioning the possibilities according to how likely or expected they are, and the contingency structure limiting what goes with what, both within chunks and across chunks.
 I have argued that matching between construal structure and stimulus constraint structure should not in general be presupposed, but that it is likely to occur in certain contexts.
 Within chunks, it is likely that syntactic constraints will be well matched.
 Across chunks, certain types of knowledge structures permit ready construals of wellstructured realities.
 I have already mentioned scripts as one example.
 Another betweenchunk example has to do with the role that knowledge of intentionality plays in story understanding.
 Stories tend to be summarized in terms of goals and plans of the main characters.
 Goals and successful plans tend to be well remembered.
 AI models of story understanding make a big point of tracking goals and goal fates.
 This was the case in Schank and Abel son (1977), and in other Yale models such as those of Wilensky (1978( and Carbonell (1978), and in a great many nonYale models as well.
 Why is this? What is there about goals that makes them so important? From a scruffy common sense point of view, this question may not seem worth asking because the answer seems obvious.
 Goals underly most of the activities of people, and what interests people is hearing about things that other people do.
 One might amplify this intuition with the observation that intentionality is not observable, but must be inferred, and there is something especially intriguing in making inferences about people to explain why they do what they do.
 Another angle is that goals relate to emotions, as I will discuss later, and emotions are especially interesting.
 A formalist would not be especially happy with such explanations.
 They essentially say that goals are interesting because everybody knows they are interesting; but no principled account is given.
 Well, it seems to me clear that a principled account can be given, and indeed, it is implicit in almost all analyses of the role of goals and plans, but it is usually not spelled out.
 Simply put, it is that intentionality is "inference rich"it provides a high degree of stimulus constraint.
 Construals structured to match will confer great advantage to the understander.
 Intentional action introduces constraints of all three kinds: combinatorial, sequential and functional equivalence.
 Especially noteworthy is the possibility of remote sequential constraint, that is, the influence of somebody having a goal on his actions much later in time.
 In a story or a novel or in life it could be dozens or hundreds of pages or days before the major goals of individuals are actualized, yet that latent potentiality is present all the while.
 This constraint demon that goals unleash is a kind of inferential time bomb set to go off one knows not when.
 No Markov process behaves like this.
 It is clear, therefore, that knowledge structures concerning goals are highly constraining, thus very important in the understanding process.
 Whether goals are the most constraining concept in texts about human activities is very hard to say, because we have no comparative constraint measures on different inferencer'ich concepts, averaged over all possible, or all available, or all experienced texts of a given type.
 I want to point out, however, that a good guiding philosophy behind structures to investigate are both highly constraini thereby being very usefjl Although we did not a'ticu was indeed the rationale g (1977) choice of scripts, as the highest priority kn CO investigage.
 Far from these concepts are very cl cerning constraint.
 the choice of knowledge is to try to pick those which r:g and highly frequrnt, for construal funt.
tions.
 late it explicitly, thi s uiding the Schank h Abel son plans, goals, and themes owledge structure concepts being ad h^c, therefore, osely tied to ideas conThus far in my account, I have given mainly a way to talk carefully about the role of structural constraint in the process of understanding, with very little in the way of predictive principles or substantive claims.
 Let me now attempt some claims based on the construal concept.
 I have said that construals are from time to time altered or updated during the course of understanding.
 I believe that what is remembered about a stimulus string is not the string itself, but the set of construals and reconstruals used in interpreting it.
 When a construal is active and inputs arrive which are not readily processed, that is, are unexpected in terms of the construal, then reconstrual becomes necessary.
 Memory for one's own construal structures, therefore, would include both the original construal and the reconstrual compelled by unforeseen stimulus events.
 Thus my proposal here is similar to Schank & Abelson's (1977) script pointer plus "weird list" idea, and to Graesser's (1981) "script pointer plus tag" hypothesis, except that it is more general in that the knowledge structure involved need not be a script, but could be anything.
 Indeed, it could be any combination of knowledge structures implicated in a construal which partially succeeds and then needs correction.
 (Among other recent treatments containing similar ideas are those of Lehnert (1979) and of Schank (Note 2)).
 There are some memory data which fit nicely with this Construal Principle (e.
g.
, Hastile, 1980; Spiro & Eposito, 1977; Graesser, 1981).
 But I am also aware that there are other data which are hard to explain by it (e.
g.
, Anderson & Pichert, 1978), and that there are complications in applying it to data in general.
 Let that be a story for another occasion, however.
 Reconstrual seems to me to be an especially interesting phenomenon.
 One class I would like to pursue arises when two incompatible construals compete with one another for processing dominance.
 By incompatible construals, I mean sets of expectations based on the other set.
 The more massive the preparations, the more serious the incompatibility.
 In cognitive terms, the massive preparatory part of a construal is the establishment of sequential constraints; thus incompatible construals involve opposing sequential constraints.
 Characteristically associated with incompatible construals, under certain conditions, are affective experience.
 There are different types of incompatibility, as I shall spell out, and with each of these is associated a different variety of affect.
 These connections are compelling enough to serve as the basis for a theory of affect.
 Recently, there have arisen in psychology a number of systematic taxonomies of affective states (deRivera, 1977; Roseman, 1979; Wilensky, Ortony & Collins, 1980) which set forth a number of disposing factors said to generate one or another affect While highly evocative, the various schemes seem to lack a unifying principle conmon to their sets of affects, this I believe to be provided by the idea of incompatible construals.
 My analysis owes by Roseman (1979), but order to get the benef principle.
 In conveyi of my theory, I will c construals, but I will understanding pradigm situation paradigm whe events might happen or involved, rather than occurrence for the cha much to the scheme devised is differently organized in it of the incompatibility ng a preliminary version ontinue to talk about depart freely from the text to refer also to a behavioral re the prospective and actual do happen to the individual his just imagining their racters in a story.
 To avoid confuction, I should say what the theory is not about.
 It is not primarily about the pleasures and pains associated directly with physical sensations, either innately or thorough conditioning.
 Thus it is not primarily about sexual pleasure, or pleasurable tastes, or about fright, pain or disgust, or about the love or aversion for the people or objects associated with those pleasures or pains.
 Secondarily, however, it may implicate pleasures or pains or other goal states, as will be explained.
 The theory is also not about the semantics of affect as coded in words or phrases capable of evoking associated emotions, such a pejorative adjectives applied to another person so as to stimulate dislike or the sunny lyrics of a love song.
 Rather, it concerns the emergence of an affecgive state as a consequence of the structural relationships in an ongoing situation: it is a structural theory of "online affect.
" In analyzing incompatible construals, we have to ask why more than one construal would ever be necessary.
 An obvious answer is that the ongoing construal leads to poor understanding, and must be changed.
 A more direct way to say this is that anticipation does not correspond to reality.
 What you imagine will happen does not in fact happen, and you must update your imaginings.
 If the update is incompatible with the previous construal, then an affective process will occur which is both a signal and a symptom of the activity of reconstrual (and which, incidentally, will be associated with high memorability for the event which precipitated the reconstrual).
 Two conditions seem basic to the degree of incompatibility of construals.
 One is the range of possible cognitive chunks implicated by the two construals, the second is the discrepancy in the hedonic import of the two construals, whereby one is highly pleasurable or painful and the other is not.
 Inferencerichness and hedonic import would seem in practice to cooccur, because one mainly makes extensive inferences about that which is personally consequential.
 But the two concepts are conceptually separable.
 In any case, not every reconstrual involves compatibility, and many incompatibilities are quite trivial in extent and significance.
 Thus structural affect is not freely evoked by minor alterations from previous expectations.
 Thus if you mistook someone to say they were from Stanford and it turned out they meant Stamford, (Connecticut), or if you thought that a session of the conference was in Room A and it turned out to be in Room B, those changes would not provoke affect (unless your mistake led to come commitment or consequence difficulty to undo).
 It is instructive to consider systematically how the inferencerichness of consequential alternative construals might vary and give rise to differing affective states.
 A useful rubric is the intentional action sequence, where a positive or negative outcome state is cognized by the individual along with an alternative outcome of opposite import.
 What is of interest is the point in the sequence at which the alternativity arises, thereby determining the depth of reconstrual which is necessary.
 There are different classes of cases, depending on whether two alternative construals are present only in imagination, or whether one is imagined and the other represents reality, or there are representations of two disparate realities because reality has changed.
 Let us suppose a sequence in which a goal leads to some planned action which through some causal instrumentality determines an outcome.
 Consider first the case in which this sequence has progressed up to a certain point in reality, and then there are alternative imagined construals, one hedonically positive, the other negative, of the uncertain future course of the sequence.
 If goal, action, and causal instrumentality are fixed, but only the outcome is uncertain, there is a minimal range of content for the alternative construals to deal with.
 The associated affective experience can be characterized as SUSPENSE.
 If goal and action are fixed, but there are alternative causal instrumentalities each potentially controlling the outcome, the alternative construals are inferentially richer and the affect in general will be more elaborate.
 Perhaps there are alternative authorities who may become responsible for the outcome, as for example two judges who might be assigned to your legal case, one probably sympathetic, the other probaly unsympathetic.
 The affect here is one of the pair of HOPE/FEAR, depending on whether the favorable or unfavorable construal is emphasized.
 When only the goal is fixed, but two (or more) well defined and distinct action plans are construable, each with uncertain connection to the important outcome, the associated affective state may be characterized as AGONIZING.
 Then not even the goal is fixed, but incompatible possible goals can be clearly construed, the affective state is one of CONFLICT.
 Consider next the case in which a particular sequence leading to a favorable outcome is construed in imagination, but reality forces an alternative construal in which the outcome is in fact negative.
 If goal.
action, and causal instrumentality are fixed, but the real negative outcome differs from the imagined positive outcome, the state is one of DISAPPOINTMENT.
 If goal and action are fixed, but the real causal instrumentality producing a positive outcome differs from the imagined causal instrumentality producing a positive outcome, the affective state is one of FRUSTRATION or ANGER.
 In relation to previously outlined cases, it can be seen that FRUSTRATION represents dashed HOPE, and DISAPPOINTMENT is negatively resolved SUSPENSE.
 In a slightly different type of subcase, the negative reality has already occured, but the individual imagines what might have been, by reconstruing the sequence starting at a particular point of departure.
 The idea "I shouldn't have done what I did; if only I had acted differently, things would have been different", corresponds to a state of EMBARASSMENT or MORTIFICATION.
 If the recrimination goes all the way back to believing that one has pursued the wrong goal, then the affective state is one of GUILT.
 Another set of subcases arises when there is an imagined negative outcome, but the actual outcome is positive.
 Without going through all the details, suffice to say that depending on the sequential point at which alternativity occurs, the respective affective states of LUCKINESS.
 GRATITUDE, PRIDE, AND RECTITUDE can be generated.
 Finally, there is the case of incompatible construals which arise because one reality is suddenly replaced by another reality.
 This need have nothing to do with an intentional action sequence, because it can be outside of the individual's control.
 If the old reality was positive, and the new reality is no longer positive, the affect is SORROW.
 If the old reality was not negative, but the new reality is negative, the affect is DISTRESS.
 If the old reality was not positive, but the new reality is replaced by one which is not negative, a state of RELIEF is produced.
 I have been perhaps somewhat scruffy in my presentation of this system of 16 affects (albeit I had earlier implied I would try to be neat).
 It was not my intention here, however, to be complete and welldisciplined, but only to lay out a particular direction of theory and research involving the role of construals in understanding, memory, and affective experience.
 The conception of a construal function as a system of subjective constraints which may or may not match objective stimulus constraints is, it seems to me, a very important conception.
 There is no reason why the idea of systems of constraint should be abandoned to cooption by the right wing within cognitive science, which presumes to investigate Mind without reference to minds.
 Instead, we need in cognitive science a fusion of left and right wings, of subjective and objective, of content and of formalism.
 REFERENCE NOTES 1.
 Abelson, R.
P.
 & Levi, A.
 Decisionmaking and decision theory.
 Chapter in preparation for G.
 Lindzey S E.
 Aronson (Eds.
), Handbook of social psychology.
 Reading, Mass.
: AddisonWesley, 1983".
 2.
 Schank, R.
C.
 D)[namic memory: A theory of learning jn compu^tej;̂  an̂ d people.
 Manuscript in preparation".
' Yale University, l'98l'.
 3.
 Cullingford, R.
 Script application: Computer understanding of newspaper stories.
 Research Report 116, Oept.
 of Computer Science, Yale University, 1978.
 4.
 D'Andrade, R.
 Cultural meaning systems.
 Paper presented at the SSRC conference on Culture and Cognition, May 1981.
 5.
 Wilensky, R.
, Collins, A.
,.
 & Orotny, A.
 A cognitive analysis of affect.
 Draft of paper.
 U.
 Cal.
 Berkeley, Nov.
, 1980.
 REFERENCES Abelson, R.
P.
 Social psychology's rational man.
 In S.
O.
 Benn & G.
W.
 Mortimore (Eds.
), Ritionalxty and the soci_a] science London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1976.
 Abelson, R.
P.
 The psychological status of the script concept.
 American Psychologist, 1981, 36, 715729.
 Anderson, R.
, & Pichert, J.
W.
 Recall of previously unrecallable information following a shift in perpective.
 Journal of Verbal Learjlina and Verbal Behavior, 1978, U , 112.
 Black, J.
B.
 & Wilensky, R.
 An evaluation of story grammars.
 Cognitive Science, 1979, 3, 213230.
 Bower, G.
H.
, Black, J.
B.
 & Turner, T.
J.
 Scripts in memory for text.
 Cognitive Psychology, 1979, 1_1, 177220.
 Bush, R.
R.
 & Mosteller, F.
 Stochastic models for learning.
 New York: Wiley, 1955.
 Carbonell, J.
G.
, Jr.
 POLITICS: Automated ideological reasoning.
 Cognitive Science, 1978, 2, 2752.
 deRivera, J.
 A structural theory of the emotions.
 Psychological Issues, Monograph 40.
 N.
Y.
: International Universities Press, 1977.
 Einhorn, H.
 & Hogarth, R.
 Behavioral decision theory: Processes of judgement and choice.
 Annual Review of Psychology, 1981, 32, 5388.
 Galambos, J.
 & Rips, L.
J.
 The representation of events in memory.
 Paper presented to the Midwestern Pscyhological Association, May, 1979.
 Graesser, A.
 Prose comprehension beyond the word.
 New York: SpringerVerlag, 1981.
 Hammond, K.
R.
 & Summers, D.
A.
 Cognitive dependence on linear and non linear cues.
 Psychological Review, 1965, 72, 215224.
 Hastie, R.
 Memory for behavioral information that confirms or contradicts a personality impression.
 In R.
 Hastie, T.
M.
 Ostrom, E.
B.
 Ebbesen, R.
S.
 Wyer, D.
L.
 Hamilton, D.
E.
 Carlston (Eds.
) Person memory: The cognitive basis of social perception.
 Hillsdale N.
J.
: Erlbaum, 1977.
 Keil, F.
C.
 Constraints on knowledge and cognitive development.
 Psychological Review, 1981, 88.
 197227.
 Kintsch, W.
, Miller, J.
, & Poison, P.
 Problems of methodology in cognitive science.
 Paper for the Cognitive Science Symposium, Boulder, Col.
, July 1981 Krauss, R.
M.
, Geller, V.
, & Olson, C.
T.
 Modalities and cause in the detection of deception.
 Paper presented at the American Psychological Association convention.
 Washington, D.
C.
, 1976 Lehnert, W.
 Text processing effects and recall memory.
 Research Report 157, Dept.
 of Computer Science, Yale University, May 1979.
 Luchins, A.
 Mechanization in problem solving.
 Psychological Mono^ra^hs, 1942, 54, Whole No.
 248.
 Mandler.
 J.
M.
 & Johnson, N.
S.
 Remembrance of things parsed: Story structure and recall.
 Cognitive Ps_y£h_okiay, 1977, 9, 111151.
 March, J.
G.
 Bounded rationality, imbiguity, and the engineering of choice.
 Bell Journal of Ejcon_orni£S and Management Science, 1978, 9, 587608'.
 Nisbett, R.
 & Ross, L.
 Human inference: strategies and shortcomings of social judgement.
 Englewood Cliffs, N.
J.
: PrenticeHall, 1980.
 Roseman, I.
 Cognitive aspects of emotion and emotional behavior.
 Paper delivered at the American Psychological Association convention.
 New York, 1979.
 Ross, L.
, Lepper, M.
R.
 & Hubbard, M.
 Perserverance in self perception and social perception: Biased attributional processes in the debriefing paradigm.
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1975, 32, 880892.
 Rumelhart, D.
E.
 Understanding and summarizing brief stories.
 In D.
 LaBerge & S.
J.
 Samuels (Eds.
), Basic processes in reading: Perception and comprehension.
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
: Erlbaum, 1977.
 Schank, R.
C.
 The structure of episodes in memory.
 In D.
G.
 Bobrow & A.
 Collins (Eds.
), Representation and understanding: studies in cognitive science.
 New York: Academic Press, 1975.
 Schank, R.
C.
 Language and memory.
 Cognitive Science, 1980, 4, 243284.
 Schank, R.
C.
 and Abelson, R.
P.
 Scripts, plans, goals and understanding.
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
: Erlbaum, 1977.
 Spiro, R.
J.
 & Esposito, J.
 Superficial processing of explicit inferences in text.
 Technical Report 60, Center for the Study of Rading, Urbana, 111.
, 1977.
 Tomkins, S.
 The psychology of being right  and left.
 Transaction, 1965, 3, 2327 Tukey, J.
W.
 Analyzing data: Sanctification or detective work? American Psychologist, 1969, 24, 8391.
 Tversky, A.
 & Kahneman, D.
 The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice.
 Science, 1980.
 Wilensky, R.
 Why John married Mary: Understanding stories involving recurreing goals.
 Cognitive Science, 1978, 2, 235266.
 S Y M P O S I U M G O A L S A Model for Planning in Everyday Situations* Robert Wilensky Computer Science Division Department of EECS University of Cdlifornia.
 Berkeley Berkeley, California 94720 1.
 Introduction  Four Tenets for a Theory of Planning Much previous work on planning and problem solving has been concerned with either very specialized systems or with highly artificial domains (e.
 g.
.
 consider Fikes and Nilsson (1971).
 Newell and Simon (1972), Sussman (1975), Shortlifle (1976)).
 More recently, there has been an increase in attention given to planning in commonplace situations.
 For example, Rieger (1975) has proposed a set of "common sense algorithms" for reasoning about everyday physical situations; HayesRoth and HayesRoth (1979) are concerned with how a person might schedule a day's activities; and Carbonell (1980) POLITICS program reasons dogmatically about political decisions.
 On another front, Sacerdoti (1977) and McDermott (1978), while operating perhaps in the more traditional problem solving context, have proposed some powerful approaches to problem solving in general.
 1.
1.
 Everyday Planning is Reasoning about Interactions Between Goals We have been developing a theory of planning that is concerned with reasoning about everyday situations.
 A central tenet of this theory is that most of the planning involved in everyday situations is primarily concerned with the interactions between goals.
 That is, planning for individual goals is assumed to be a fairly simple matter, consisting primarily of the straightforward application of rather large quantities of world knowledge.
 The complexity of planning is attributed to the fact that most situations involve numerous goals that interact in complicated ways.
 Thus while traditional problem solving research has been concerned with finding the solution to a single, difficult problem (e.
 g.
.
 finding the winning chess move), most everyday problem solving consists of synthesizing solutions to fairly simple, interactine oroblems.
 For example, a typical everyday situation that involves the sort of planning we are interested in might be to obtain some nails, and also buy a hammer.
 The plan for each goal is straightforward: One simply goes to the hardware store, buys the desired item, and returns.
 The problem lies in recognizing that it is a terrible idea to execute these plans independently.
 Rather, the seemingly simple common sense plan is to combine the two individual plans, resulting in the plan of going to the hardware store, buying both items, and then returning.
 Simple as this situation may be, most conventional planners are illequipped to handle it.
 Although some planning programs have mechanisms for removing redundancies from a plan, they generally lack a mechanism for even noticing this sort of interaction if these plans are derived from heretofore unrelated goals.
 Perhaps more importantly, the interaction between plans may have more complex ramifications.
 For example, if enough items are to be purchased at the hardware store, then a better plan might be to take one's car, while walking may do otherwise.
 Thus a good part of planning involves detecting the interactions between goals, figuring out their implications, and then deciding what to do about them.
 1.
2.
 Planning Knowledge Should be Equally Available for Understanding The second tenet of our theory of planning is that it should be equally usable by both a planner and an understander.
 That is, while a planner uses its planning knowledge to bring about a desired state of atTairs.
 an understander may need to use this same knowledge to comprehend the actions of a person it is watching or of a character about whom it is reading.
 For example, a planner with the goal of keeping fit might take up jogging; an understander might use the same knowledge to infer that someone who has taken up jogging may have done so because he had the goal of staying in shape.
 Planning and understanding are rather different processes, and thia will of course be reflected in our planning and understanding mechanisms.
 However, our theory of planning specifies that knowledge should be represented in a fashion so that it is usable by either mechanism.
 1.
3.
 MetaPIanning is Used as the Driving Principle The third salient feature of our theory is that it is based on meta^lanning.
 By this I mean that the problems a planner encounters in producing a plan for a given situation may themselves be formulated as goals.
 These "metagoals" can then be submitted to the planning mechanism, which treats them just like any other goals.
 That is, the planner attempts to find a "metaplan" for this metagoal; the result of successful application of this plan will be the solution to the original planning problem.
 A typical example of a metagoal is the goal RESOLVEGOALCONFLICT.
 A planner would presumably have an instance of this goal whenever it detects that some of its "ordinary" goals are in conflict with one another.
 The metaplans for this goal are the various goal conflict resolution strategies available to the planner.
 Metaplanning is described in more detail in Wilensky (1980).
 Here, we give only a brief characterization of its main features and advantages.
 Metagoals are organized by metathemes.
 These are very general principles of planning that describe situations in which metagoals come into being.
 We summarize these briefly: Metathemes 1) DON'T WASTE RESOURCES 2) ACHIEVE AS MANY GOALS AS POSSIBLE 3) MAXIMIZE THE VALUE OF THE GOALS ACHIEVED 4) AVOID IMPOSSIBLE GOALS •Research sponsored in pan by the National Science Foundation under grant HCS7906543 and by the Office of Naval Research under contract N0001460C0732 11 As an example of how these function, the metatheme "ACHIEVE AS MANY GOALS AS POSSIBLE" is responsible for detecting goal conflicts.
 That is, if the planner intends to perform a set of actions that will negatively interact with one another, this metatheme causes the planner to have the goal of resolving the conflict.
 If this metagoal fails, i.
 e.
, the planner could not find a way to resolve the conflict, then the metatheme "MAXIMIZE THE VALUE OF THE GOALS ACHIEVED" springs into action.
 This metatheme sets up the goal of arriving at a scenario in which the less valuable goals are abandoned in order to fulfill the most valuable ones.
 The details of the metaplans involved in these processes are described in length in the last two sections of this paper.
 Metaplanning has a number of advantages over other approaches to planning; these advantages are summarized below: 1.
3.
1.
 Metaplanning knowledge can be used for both planning and understanding As metagoals and metaplans are declarative structures in the same sense as are ordinary goals and plans, they may be used to understand situations as well as plan in them.
 Thus an understander with access to this knowledge would be able to interpret someone's action as an attempt to resolve a goal conflict, for example.
 In contrast, planning programs that have the equivalent knowledge embedded procedurally would not be able to conveniently use it to explain someone else's actions.
 1.
3.
2.
 The same planning mechanism can apply to more difficult tasks.
 Metaplanning knowledge generally embodies a set of strategies for complicated plan interactions.
 By formulating this knowledge in terms of goals and plans, the same planning architecture that already exists for simpler planning can be used to implement more complicated planning involving multiple goals, etc.
 1.
3.
3.
 More general resolution of traditional planning problems Traditional planners usually tieat problems such as goal conflicts by special purpose means by the introduction of critics, for example (Sussman 1975, Sacerdoti 1977).
 This is equivalent to having the general problem solver consult an expert when it gets in trouble.
 The metaplanning allows the general problem solver to call a general problem solver (itself) instead.
 Thus all the power of such a system can be focussed on planning problems, rather than just relying on a few expert lactics.
 Of course, all the specific knowledge usually embodied in critics would still be available to the general problem solver.
 But the metaplanning model allows this knowledge to interact with all other knowledge as it now take take part in general reasoning processes.
 1.
3.
4.
 Representational advantages The metaplanning model also provides more fiexibility when no solution can be found.
 Since a metagoal represents the formulation of a problem, the existence of the problem may be dealt other than its being fully resolved.
 For example, the problem solver may simply decide to accept a flawed plan if the violation is viewed as not being too important, or decide to abandon one of the goals that it can't satisfy.
 By separating solving the problem from formulating the problem, the problem may be accessed as opposed to treated, an option that most other problem solving models do not allow.
 1.
4.
 Projection is Used to Infer Goals and Debug Plana The fourth signiflcant feature of our planning model is that it is based on projection.
 That is, as the planner formulates a plan for a goal, the execution of this plan is simulated in a hypothetical world model.
 Problems with proposed plans may be detected by examining these hypothetical worlds.
 Projection not only enables the planner to flnd problems with its own plans, but it also enables it to determine that a situation merits having a new goal.
 For example, sensing an impending danger requires the planner to project from the current state of aflfairs into a hypothetical world which it finds less desirable.
 Having done this projection, the planner can infer that it should have the goal of preventing the undesirable state of aflfairs from coming into being.
 Projecting hypothetical realities also allows a general "goal detection" mechanism to work for metagoals as well as for "ordinary" goals.
 When proposed plans for goals are projected, interactions will appear in the hypothetical world.
 Since such interactions generally indicate that some important planning principle is not being adhered to, the occurrence of this hypothetical negative interaction is usually a signal to the planner to achieve some particular metagoal.
 Working with projected universes entails some liabilities as well, as does the notion of metaplanning and of using highly declarative representations.
 However, our claim is that the prices associated with these ideas are prices that must be paid anyway.
 By putting them together in the manner described here, a deal of power is obtained for no additional cost.
 In the next section, I discuss the general structure of a planning mechanism based on these assumptions.
 This is the structure used in PANDORA (Plan ANalysis with Dynamic Organization, Revision, and Application), a planning system now under construction at Berkeley.
 The sections following show how these mechanisms function together in reasoning about goal conflict situations.
 As we have noted, we intend these ideas to be applicable to understanding as well as planning, and in fact, they are being used in a new implementation of PAM, a planbased story understanding system.
 While we do not discuss the structure of PAM here, the analysis of goal conflicts is presented in a form in which its use in understanding as well as planning may be seen.
 2.
 The Design of a Planner Based on Uetaplanning This section described the overall architecture of a planner based on the four tenets just considered.
 The planner is composed of the following major components: 1) The Goal Detector This mechanism is responsible for determining that the planner has a goal.
 The goal detector has access to the planner's likes and dislikes, to the stale of the world and any ciiaiiges that may befall it, and to the planner's own internal planning structures and hypothetical world models.
 The goal detector can therefore establish a new goal because of some change in the environment, because such a goal is instrumental to another goal, or in order to resolve a problem in a planning structure that arises in a hypothetical world model.
 12 2) The Plan Generator The plan generator proposes plans for the goals already detected.
 It may dredge up stereotyped solutions, it may edit previously known plans to fit the current situation, or it may create fairly novel solutions.
 The plan generator is also rfcsponsible for expanding highlevel plans into their primitive components to allow execution.
 3) The Executor The executor simply carries out the plan steps as proposed by the plan generator.
 It is responsible for the detection of errors, although not with their correction.
 The importance of the goal detector should be emphasized.
 Most planning systems do not worry about where their goals come from; highlevel goals are generally handed to the plarmer in the form of a problem to be solved.
 However, a planning system needs to infer its own goals for a number of reasons: an autonomous planner needs to know when it should go into action; for example, it should be able to recognize that it is hungry or that its power supply is low and what goal it should therefore have.
 It should be able to take advantage of opportunities that present themselves, even if it doesn't have a particular goal in mind at the time.
 It should be able to protect itself from dangers from its environment, from other planners, or from consequences of its own plans.
 The goal detector operates through the use of a mechanism called the Noticer The Noticer is a general facility in charge of recognizing that something has occurred that is of interest to some part of the system.
 The Noticer monitors changes in the external environment and in the internal states of the system.
 When it detects the presence of something that it was previously instructed to monitor, it reports this occurrence to the source that originally told it to look for that thing.
 The Noticer can be thought of as a collection of IFADDED demons whose only action is to report some occurrence to some other mechanism.
 Goals are detected by having themes and metathemes asserted into the Noticer with orders to report to the goal detector.
 Theme is a term used by Schank and Abelson (1975) to mean something that gives rise to a goal; a metatheme, similarly, is responsible for generating metagoals.
 For example, we can assert to the noticer that when it gets hungry (i.
 e.
, when the value of some internal state reaches a certain point), the planner should have the goal of being not hungry (i.
 e.
, of changing this value), or that if someone is threatening to kill the planner, that the planner should have the goal of protecting its life.
 On the metalevel, we might assert that if a goal conflict comes into existence, then the planner should have the metagoal of resolving this conflict.
 Note that the presumption of a goal detector coupled with metaplanning creates a system of considerable power.
 For example, no separate mechanism is required for detecting goal conflicts or for noticing that a set of proposed plans will squander a resource.
 The need to resolve conflicts or conserve resources is expressed by formulating descriptions of the various situations in which this may occur, and the appropriate metagoal to have when it does.
 By asserting these descriptions into the Noticer to detect metagoals, goal conflicts and other important goal interactions are handled automatically.
 The planner component of our model itself consists of three components; 1) The Proposer, which suggests plausible plans to try 2) The Projector, which tests plans by building hypothetical world models of what it would be like to execute these plans 3) The Revisor, which can edit and remove parts of a proposed planning structure The Proposer begins by suggesting the most specific plan it knows of that is applicable to the goal.
 If this plan is rejected or fails, the Proposer will propose successively more general and "creative" solutions.
 Once the Proposer has suggested a plan, the Projector starts computing what will happen to the world as the plan is executed.
 The difficult problems in conducting a simulation involve reasoning about "possible world" type situations which are not amenable to standard temporal logic (McCarthy and Hayes, 1969).
 However, we finesse this issue by defining hypothetical states in terms of what the planner thinks of in the course of plan construction.
 In other words, our solution is to let the system assert the changes that would be made into a hypothetical data base, in the meantime letting the goal detector have access to these states.
 Thus if the plan being simulated would result in the planner dying, say, this would constitute a hypothetical undesirable state, which might trigger further goals, etc.
 As the Projector hypothetically carries out the plan, and other goals and metagoals are detected by the goal detector, the original plan may have to be modified.
 This is done by explicit calls to the Revisor, which knows the plan structure and can make edits or deletions upon request.
 The modified plan structure is simulated again until it is either found satisfactory or the entire plan is given up and a new one suggested by the Proposer.
 Actually, the function of the Projector is somewhat more pervasive than has so far been described.
 The Projector must be capable of projecting current events into future possibilities based both on the intentions of the planner and on its analysis of those events themselves.
 For example, if the planner sees a boulder rolling down the mountain, it is the job of the Projector to project the future path that the boulder will traverse.
 If the projected path crosses that of the planner, for example, a preservation goal should be detected.
 Thus the Projector is a quite powerful and general device that is capable of predicting plausible futures.
 13 3.
 Reasoning about Goal Conflicts In the next two sections we give a more detailed analysis of one particular part of our planning model, namely, the resolution of goal conflicts.
 The problem is important in its own right; however, the presentation that follows is aimed at demonstrating the kind of "strategy architecture" to which the model is conducive.
 In particular, the section illustrates a number of important metagoals and the metaplans for them, and describes how they would be invoked and utilized by the model.
 The section also emphasizes the utility of metaplanning for the application of planning knowledge to understanding goal conflicts as well as to planning for them.
 Since it is desirable to achieve all of one's goals, a planner faced with a goal conflict will probably attempt to resolve that conflict.
 We express this by saying that the state of having a goal conflict is a situation that causes the metatheme "ACHIEVE AS MANY GOALS AS POSSIBLE" to become active.
 In such a situation, this metatheme creates the metagoal RESOLVEGOALCONFLICT.
 This is a metagoal because resolving the conflict can be viewed as a planning problem that needs to be solved by the creation of a better plan.
 In this formulation, the resolution of the goal conflict is performed by the execution of a metaplan, the result of whii^h will be a set of altered plans whose execution will not interfere with one another.
 The knowledge needed to replan around a goal conflict is quite diverse, and may depend upon the particular goals in question and on the nature of the conflict.
 However, the metaplans with which this knowledge is applied are rather general.
 To see why.
 it is necessary to ask how it is possible for goal conflicts to be resolved at all.
 There appear to be two ways in which goal conflicts can come about that determine how they may be resolved: 1) The conflict detected is based on the plans for one's goals, rather than on the goals themselves.
 In this case, it may be possible to achieve the goals by other, nonconflicting plans.
 2) The conflict depends upon some additional circumstance or condition beyond the stated goals or plans.
 The conflict might therefore be resolved if this circumstance is changed.
 We therefore define two very general metaplans, REPLAN and CHANGECIRCUMSTANCE.
 Of course, to be efTective, we need to supply these metaplans with more information; if we use REPLAN blindly, for example, we might end up enumerating all possible plans for each conflicting goal, although many of these plan combinations will present the same problem that caused the original goal conflict.
 3.
1.
 REPLAN There are a number of different replanning strategies applicable to goal conflict situations.
 They arc given here in order of decreasing specificity.
 This is in accordance with our belief about the order in which such plans would actually be used, i.
 .
e, the most specific one first, then progressively more general ones, until a satisfactory set of plans is found.
 In this respect, metaplans are enli.
ely analogous to ordinary plans insofar as the planning process is conct'rned.
 The order of plan application is just a corollary of the First Law of Knowledge Application "Always use the most specific piece of knowledge applicable" 3.
1.
1.
 USENORUALPLAN applied to resolvin« goal conflicts The most specific replanning strategy is likewise analogous to the planning strategy for ordinary goals, namely, find a normal plan.
 A normal plan in the case of goal conflict is to find a stored plan specifically designed for use in a goal conflict between the kinds of goals found in the current situation.
 For example, consider the following situation: (1) Mary was very hungry, but she was trying to lose some weight.
 She decided to take a diet pill.
 In (1), there is a conflict between the goal of losing weight and satisfying hunger, as the normal plan for the latter goal involves eating.
 The REPLAN metaplan is used, and the USENORMALPLAN strategy applied.
 The normal plan found that is applicable to both goals is to take a diet pill.
 Just as many objects are functionally defined by the role they play in ordinary plans, so some objects are functionally defined by the role they play in plans aimed at resolving specific goal conflicts.
 Thus a diet pill is an object functionally defined by its ability to resolve the conflict between hunger and weight loss; a raincoat is defined by the role it plays in preventing wetness when one must go outside.
 In fact, a great deal of mundane planning knowledge appears to consist of plans for resolving specific types of goal conflicts.
 3.
1 2.
 Intelligent use of TRYALTERNATEPLAN to find nonconflicting set A general planning strategy that is applicable when a plan cannot be made to work is to try another plan for that goal.
 In the case of resolving goal conflicts, this means that alternative plans for each conflicting goal can be proposed until a set is found that are not in conflict.
 As noted above, this may be costly, but it will only be tried when no canned conflict resolution plan has been found.
 Moreover, the plan can provide some intelligent ways of proposing new alternatives that may help keep costs down.
 For example, consider the following situation: (2) John was going outside to pick up the paper when he noticed it was raining.
 He looked for his raincoat, but he couldn't find it.
 He decided to get Fido to fetch the paper for him.
 Here, John first thought to walk outside, but then found that this would cause a conflict.
 As his normal plan for resolving this conflict failed, John tried proposing other plans, looking for ones that wouldn't entail his getting wet.
 Since getting the dog to fetch the paper is such a plan, and since John presumably doesn't care if Fido gets wet, this plan is adopted.
 The metdplanning strategy used here is called TRYALTERNATIVEPLAN.
 The difference between I'sing this metjplan and blind generate and test strategics is that some control can be exerted here over exactly what is undone and and what is looked for as a replacement.
 For example, the backtracking here need not be cluotiological or dependencydirected, but can be knau.
le.
djedirected.
 That is, rather than undo the last planning decision, a planning decision related to either goal can be undone, possibly based on an informed guess.
 In rtddition, when fetching a new plnn, it may be possible to specify in the fetch some conditions that the fetched plan may have to meet without actually testing that plan for a conflict.
 For example, in the case of getting the newspaper when it is raining, we can ask for a plan for gftting something thai doesn't involve going outside.
 That is, we can look for a plan for one goal that does not contain an action that led to the original 14 conflict.
 If our memory mechanism can handle such requests, then we can retrieve only those plans that do not conflict in the same way that the original plan does.
 In order for this to work, TRYALTERNATIVKPUN needs to know what part of a plan contributed to the goril conflict so it can look for a plan without this action.
 This generally depends upon the kind of conflict.
 We Cdri formulate this within the metaplanning framework by defining a metaplan called MAKEATTRIBUTION.
 Here, MAKEATTRIBUTION is used as a subplan of the TRYALTERNATIVEPUN metaplan, although we shall make other uses of it below.
 TRYALTERNATIVEPUN first asks MAKEATTRIBUTION to specify a cause of the problem.
 and then fetches a new plan without the objectional element in it.
 TRYALTERNATIVEPLAN can also control how far up the proposed goalsubgoal structure it should go to undo a decision.
 Thus, if no alternative plan for a goal can be found, the goal itself can be questioned if it is a subgoal of some other plan.
 For example, consider the following scenario: (3) John was going to get the newspaper when he noticed it was raining.
 He decided to listen to the radio instead.
 Here the entire subgoal of getting the newspaper was eliminated.
 Since this was apparently a subgoal of finding out the news, the alternative plan of listening to the radio can be substituted.
 Once again, MAKEATTRIBUTION is used to propose a plan that doesn't involve an unwanted step.
 The difTerence between this and the last case is that here a plan lying above the conflicting goal is replanned.
 3.
2.
 CHANGECIRCUMSTANCE In addition to the REPLAN metaplan, the other general goal conflict resolution strategy is to change the circumstance that contributes to the conflict.
 This is actually more general than REPLAN, because it may be applicable to conflicts where the goals themselves exclude one another, whereas REPLAN requires the conflict to be planbased.
 CHANGECIRCUMSTANCE can resolve a goal conflict by altering a state of the world that is responsible for the goals conflicting with one another.
 Once this has been achieved, the original set of plans may be used without encountering the original problem.
 For example, consider the following situations: (4) John had a meeting with his boss in the morning.
 but he was feeling ill and wanted to stay in bed.
 He decided to call his boss and try to postpone the meeting until he felt better.
 (5) John wanted to live in San Francisco, but he also wanted to live near Mary, and she lived in New York.
 John tried to persuade Mary to move to San Francisco with him.
 In (4), John's conflict is caused by his plan to attend the meeting and his plan to stay home and rest.
 These plans conflict because of the time constraints on John's meeting, which force the plans to overlap; the plans require John to be in two places at once, so they cannot be executed simultaneously.
 If the time constraint on attending the meeting were relaxed, however, then the conflict would cease to exist.
 Thus rather than alter his plans, John can seek to change the circumstances that cause his plans to conflict by attempting to remove the time constraint that are a cause of the difTiculty.
 In (5), the conflict is between living in San Francisco and being near Mary, who is in New York.
 The basis for this exclusion involves the location of San Francisco and of Mary.
 However, if one of these locations were changed so that the distance between them were reduced, them the state would no longer exclude one another.
 Thus John can attempt to change Mary's location, while still maintaining his original goals.
 To decide what circumstance to change, a planner once again needs to analyze the cause of the conflict Thus CHANGECIRCUMSTANCE first requires the use of MAKEA>TTR1BUTI0N to propose a candidate for alteration.
 As was the case for REPLAN, MAKEATTRIBUTION requires access to detailed knowledge about the nature of negative goal interactions in order to find a particular circumstance with which to meddle.
 An analysis of such interactions appears in Wilensky (197B).
 4.
 Goal AbandoDment When attempts to resolve a goal conflict are unsuccessful, a planner must make a decision about what should be salvaged.
 In terms of metaplanning.
 we can describe these "goal abandonment " situations as follows.
 The inability to achieve a RESOLVEGOALCONFLICT metagoal results in the planner having this failed metagoal.
 Having a failed RESOLVEGOALCONFLICT metagoal is a condition that triggers the metatheme MAXIMIZE THE VALUE OF THE GOALS ACHIEVED.
 This triggering condition causes this metatheme to invoke a new metagoal.
 called CHOOSEMOSTVALUABLESCENARIO.
 This goal is satisfied when the relative worth of various achievable subsets of the conflicting goals is assessed.
 and the subset offering the greatest potential yield determined.
 To achieve this metagoal.
 we postulate a SIMULATEANDSELECT metaplan.
 This plan proposes various combinations of goals to try.
 and computes the worth of each combination.
 The most valuable set of goals is returned as the scenario most worth pursuing.
 4.
1.
 The SIMULATEANDSELECT metaplan The SIMULATEANDSELECT metaplan has a rich structure.
 To begin with, it makes a number of presumptions about evaluating the cost and worth of goals and of comparing them to one another.
 We presume that values can be attributed to individual states in isolation ceteris parihiis, and that the value of a set can be computed from its parts.
 This does not presume that the computation is simple: indeed, it may involve the consultation of large amounts of world knowledge.
 However, we do assume that all values can be made commeasurable.
 The general issues involving attributing values to goals are discussed (although by no means resolved) in Wilensky (1980).
 The SIMULATEANDSELECT metaplan has in efTect two distinct options.
 The first is quite straightforward.
 It simply involves constructing maximal achievable (i.
 e.
, nonconflicting) subsets from among the conflicting goals, and evaluating the net worth of each one.
 Since we are generally dealing with two goals in a conflict, this means just evaluating the worth of one goal and comparing it to the value of the other.
 Thus if having the newspaper is deemed more valuable than getting wet, then the planner walks outside to get the newspaper and allows hJmsei/ to get soaked.
 Alternatively, a reader trying to understand someone else's behavior would use knowledge about this metaplan to make inferences about their value system.
 If we observe John risking getting wet into to get his morning paper, then we conclude that having his paper is worth more to him than getting wet.
 However, there is another set of alternatives that need to be considered.
 Consider once again the example of fetching the newspaper in from the rain, in which the original goals are to get the newspaper and to remain dry.
 Rather than abandon either goal completely, a reasonable alternative is to try to reduce the degree to which one gets wet as much as possible.
 A plan for remaining as dry as possible while moving through the rain is to run as fast as one can.
 This plan satisfies one goal entirely, and another to a degree.
 The total value of this scenario is likely to be greater than the value of 15 staying dry but not getting the paper, and since the other abandonment possibility (getting the paper but getting soaked) is clearly worse than this (i.
 e.
, getting the paper but getting less soaked), the scenario involving partial fulflUment is likely to be adopted.
 Partial goal fulfillment is a general principle that, is applicable to all goals thai involve scalar values.
 It allows the SIMULATEANDSELECT melaplan to propose options in which the partial fulfillment of one goal enables the (possibly partial) fulfillment of the other.
 This process is illustrated by the "newspaper in the rain" example: MAKEATTRIBUTION determines that the problem with the "stay dry" goal above is that it requires not going outside.
 Thus a partial version of this goal is sought that doesn't involve this condition.
 In the case of not getting wet above, the "stay as dry as possible" alternative is selected because this doesn't require not going outside.
 This scenario is therefore hypothesized and evaluated along with the strict abandonment options, and the one with the highest value chosen.
 5.
 Summary and Projections We have proposed a theory of planning based on four tenets: (l) Commonsense planning is essentially the consideration of interactions of otherwise simple plans, (2) knowledge about planning should be usable both by a planner and an understander, (3) planning problems should be formulated as metagoals, and solved by the same planning mechanism responsible for the fulfillment of ordinary goals, and (4) to accomplish much of its mandate, Lhe planner makes projections of the future based on its current knowledge of the world and its own tentative plans.
 These tenets form the basis for a model of planning whose most salient features are a goal detector and a projector.
 The goal detector is used to infer goals, including metagoals, based on the situations in which the planner finds itself; the projector is used to guess what the future will bring based on the planner's current beliefs and plans.
 As the goal detector has access to the hypothetical situations simulated by the projector, it can delect problems with currently intended plans by noticing their consequences in hypothetical realities.
 These problems are dealt with by setting up metagoals to try to assure a more desirable future state of affairs.
 We examined this tiiodel of planning in the particular domain of goal conflict resolution.
 Here we found use for the melaplans REPLAN (consisting of U3EN0RMALPI,A\ and USEAlT^RXATfiPl.
AN) and CHANGECIKCUMSTA.
NCE for the mctagoal RRS0I,VEG0A1.
,CONFLICT.
 Both melaplans make use of the powerful subplan .
MAKEATTRIBUTION.
 For the related goal of CF00i;t;.
V10STVAl.
UABM:SCENARI0, the SIMUI,ATEA\'DSEI.
ECT melaplan is used to create alternatives involving goal abandonment and partial goal fulfillment.
 .
MAKEATTRIBI;T10.
\ was found to be useful here as well.
 We are cuirently attempting to test these ideas in Lv\o programs.
 PAM, a ?!ory understanding system, uses knortifdge about goal in! Lractions to understand stonrs involving multiple goals.
 That is, PAM can detect situations like goal conflict and goal competilinn, and, realizing that these tlireaten CPi'tain metagoals, PAM will interpret a character's subsequent behavior as a metaplan to address the negative consequences of Ihese interactions Thus PAM makes use of the knowledge structures described above, but of course, it does not lest the model of planning per sc.
 Both the model of planning knowledge and of planning is being used in the development of I'ANDORA (Plarj ANaly/.
er with Dynamic Orgarn/ation, Revision and Application).
 PANDORA is given a description of a situation and determines if it has any goals it sliould act upon.
 It then c;r»;atr;s plans for these goals, using projection to lest them.
 New goals, including metagoals, may be inferred in l.
lie process, possibly causing PANDORA to revise its [)revious plans The following is an example of the kind of planning situation that PANDORA can handle.
 PANDORA is presented with a task that requires it to get some nails and lo get a hammer.
 PANDORA proposes the normal plans for these goals, which require it lo go lo the store, buy the desired item, and return.
 As the plans involve some common preconditions, the melatheme "DON'T WASTE RESOURCES" causes PANDORA lo have the metagoal COMBINEPLANS.
 A melaplan associated with this goal synthesizes a new plan that involves going to the store, buying both objects, and returning.
 PANDORA can also detect and resolve a number of goal conflictbase situations.
 In addition, PANDORA is being used lo model the planning processes of a human who needs lo cook dinner during a power failure, in which most of the normal plans for one's goals will not be eflective.
 References 1 Fikes, R.
 and Nilsson, N.
 J.
 (1971).
 STRIPS: A new approach lo the application of theorem proving to problem solving.
 Artificial Intelligence 2, 189208.
 2 HayesRoth, B.
 and HayesRoth, F.
 (1978).
 Cognitive Processes in Planning.
 RAND Report R23660NR.
 3 McDermott, Drew (1978).
 Planning and Acting.
 In Cognitive Science vol.
 2, no.
 2.
 4 McCarthy, J.
 and Hayes, P.
 J.
 (1969) Some philosophical problems from the standpoint of artificial intelligence.
 In Meltzer and D.
 .
Michie (eds.
) Machine intelligence, vol.
 4.
 New York; American Elsevier, pp.
 463502.
 5 Newell, A.
, and Simon, H.
 A.
 (1972).
 H u m a n Problem Solving.
 Englewood Clifls, N.
 J.
: Prentice Hall.
 6 Rieger, C.
 (1975).
 The Commonsense Algorithm as a Basis for Computer Models of Human Memory, Inference, Belief, and Contextual Language Comprehension.
 In Theoretical Issues in Natural Language Processing.
 R.
 Schank and B.
 L.
 NashWebber, (eds.
).
 Cambridge, Mass.
 7 Sacerdoti, E.
 D.
 (1977).
 A Structure for Plans and Behavior Elsevier NorthHolland, Amsterdam.
 8 Schank, R.
 C.
 and Abelson, R.
 P (1977).
 Scripts.
 Plans.
 Goals, and Understanding.
 Lawrence Erlbaum Press, Hillsdale, N.
J.
 9 Shortliffe, E.
 H.
 (1976).
 MYCIN: Computerbased Medical Consultations American Elsevier.
 10 Stefik, Mark J.
 (1980).
 Planning and MelaPlanning MOLGE.
\: Part 2.
 Stanford Heuristic Programming Project HPP8013 (working paper), Computer Science Department, Stanford University.
 11 Sussman, G.
 J.
 (1975).
 A Computer Model of SkUL Acquisition American Elsevier, New York.
 12 Wilensky, R.
 (1978).
 Understanding goalbased stories.
 Yale University Research Report No.
 140.
 13 Wilensky, R.
 (1980).
 Metaplanning: Representing and Using Knowledge about Planning in Problem Solving and Natural Language Understanding.
 Berkeley Electronic Research Laboratory Memorandum No, UCB/ERL/M80/33.
 16 A CommitmentBased F r a m e w o r k for Describing Informal Cooperative W o r k by Richard E.
 Fikes Cognitive and Instructional Sciences G r o u p Xerox Palo Alto Research Center June 1981 Abstract In this paper we present a framework for describing cooperative work in informal domains such as an office.
 We argue that standard models of such work are inadequate for describing the adaptibility and variability that is observed in offices, and are fiindamentally misleading as metaphors for understanding the skills and knowledge needed by computers or people to do the work.
 The basic claim in our alternative framework is tliat an agent's work is defined in terms of making and fijlfilling commiunents to other agents.
 The tasks described in those commitments are merely agreed upon means for fulfilling the commitments, and the agents involved in the agreement decide in any given situation how and whether a gi\en commitment has been ftjlfilled.
 W e also claim that in informal domains, descriptions of tasks, functions, and procedures are necessarily incomplete and imprecise.
 They result from negotiations among the agents and serve as agreed upon specifications of what is to be done.
 The descriptions evolve during their use in continuing negotiations as situations and questions arise in which their meaning is unclear.
 These claims imply that for a given situation an agent using such descriptions must be capable of interpreting imprecise descriptions, dctcmiining effective methods for performing tasks, and negotiating with other agents to determine task requirements.
 Introduction In Uiis paper we present a framework for describing cooperative work in domains where there is no agreed upon formal model of the tasks and functions lo be done, nor of the procedures for doing them (i.
e.
, in informal task domains).
 Most of the work people do is in such informal domains where it is not feasible lo create precise statements of the tasks to be done, the situatiims in which they arc lo be done, the resources available, nor the capabilities of the processors doing them.
 For example, people ,irc regularly confronted with task descriptions such as write a progress report on the projecl".
 "describe tJie items to be purchased", "yield right of way", "keep your eye on the ball", or "slice chicken breasts very thinly into julienne strips" Tlic project that produced this framework has been focused on the problems of automating office work involving the use of prespccified prtxredures, and our experiences with those problems motivate and proMdc examples for the discussions in this paper However, the results reported here arc intended to be generally applicable in any task domain where tasks and procedures arc infomially specified, and agents enlist each other's help to achieve their individual goals.
 We began our office amomation efforts by attempting to develop a model of the work being automated that would provide a basis for our system design efforts.
 W e were parliculariy interested in describing th( skills and information needed to do the work, and in accounting for th( iidaplibilily and variability of methods used by people in pcrforminf their tasks.
 Our initial thesis was that office prixcdures arc like computer programs and they are "executed" by a collection of office workers in a mannc: an.
ilcigoiis to a collection of computers executing a program.
 It seemed ; simple ni,iltcr lo aiitomalc office procedures by storing thcin in ; compiucri/ed data base as if they were programs, fhen, at each step ii the cvc(uiion of tlie procedures in an office the computer could do tĥ  step itself, or tell the person doing the step what operation lo do am then monitor the results.
 As »c prixccdcd, fundamcnl.
il problems arose tliat led us lo questioi our thesis [likes and Henderson).
 One such problem was that ou model did not account for the variability in the way tasks ar accomplished, tor example, an office worker has more options ii following a procedure than our model described.
 He can choose I Ignore some of the requirements of a task (e.
g.
.
 leave some fields of fonn blank), renegotiate the requirements of a Uisk (e.
g.
, request extension of a deadline), or use some method other than the standard procedure for performing a task.
 A second problem was that our model did not account for the difficulties related lo working with informally specified tasks, functions, and procedures.
 For example, die infomialily of office work makes infeasiblc die spccific.
itioii of precise algorithms for performing tasks.
 Situations occur in which the available procedures do not indicate what to do (eg.
, a vendor claims dial goods were delivered, but no record of their arrival can be found), what is indicated cannot be done (e.
g.
, a deadline has already past), or what is indicated is not the preferred method for perfomiing die task (e.
g.
, because an unexpected resource is available).
 Hence, the work involved in using office procedures is qualitatively different from the work involved in executing a formal algoridim.
 We concluded, then, that modeling procedural office work as simple program execution is an inadequate basis for automating it and is misleading as a metaphor for understanding die skills and knowledge needed by computers or people lo do the work.
 That conclusion led us to search for alternative ways of modeling cooperative work that would account for the way office tasks arc actually performed, and would inform us regarding the required skills and knowledge.
 This paper presents the initial results of that search, an alternative based on tlie agreements made by agents performing die work and agents for w h o m Die work is done (see jl lores and ludlow) for another analysis of orPice work based on such agreements).
 Aniilyzing Cooperative Iiirormal Work the Social Nature of Tasks and Functions Tasks Wc begin by an.
ilyzing a simple work situation in which an agent has a task that he wants done.
 For the purposes of this discussion we will consider a task to be defined as a set of goals to be achieved while maini.
iimng a set of constraints.
 The basic tenet of our model is that tasks are essentially s(x:ial in nature in Uiat they are done by one agent (a contr.
ictor) for some other agent (a client).
 The situation where an agent does a task for himself is the special case in which die client and contractor are Uie same agent.
 17 http://fundamcnl.
ilA clicnl (i.
e.
, an agent who w.
iiils a task done) can choose lo enlist some other agent to be the contractor for a task.
 M k client accomplishes that cnlistinent by establishing a "task contract" witli the contractor (sec the work on contract nets |l)avis and Smith] |Siiiith] for a detailed nmdel of how such contracts are established) W c model a contract as consisting of a collection of commitmcnLs.
 each made by one of the contracting agents to anotlicr of the contracting agents.
 A task contract is an agreement between two agents containing a commitment by one of the agents (the contractor) to do a task for a second agent (the clicnl).
 Che contract may also contain other commitments, such as a commitment by the client to remunerate (i e.
.
 achieve some goal for) the contractor in return for accomplishing ihc task.
 In order for i task contr.
ict to be established, the client and contractor must agree on the task that is to be performed.
 ITieir negotiations will produce an agreed upon dcscripiion of the task, and the coinmiuncnt will be a statement of intent to do the described task, nicrcfore, we consider cooperative Uisks as being defined by a soci.
il process, and as representing a negotiated agreement between the client and contractor.
 Note that a task contract establishes a goal for the contractor of fulfilling his commitment to the client, and pcrfonning die described task is only a means for achieving diat goal.
 That observ Jtion is one of the bases for our explanations of the behavior variations observed in human cooperative work situations, llial is, the agreed upon task description provides the contractor with a set of sufficient conditions for fulfilling his comniitmenl, and therefore represents one method of achieving his goal.
 However, any actions by the contractor that result in the client agreeing that Ihc commitment has been fulfilled will achieve Ihc contractor's goal.
 For example.
 Die contractor may choose to achieve some variation of the task's goal, ignore some of tlie constraints, convince the client that die task shouldn't be done, etc.
 He is free to use whatever method he thinks will succeed and is most desirable for him in the context of his other goals and constraints.
 In order for a contractor to make use of the flexibility available to him in fulfilling his commitment, he must know who the client is, the client must be accessible to him for negotiation, and the contractor must be capable of planning and performing alternative courses of action to those described in the usk contract Functions Often in human work situations, a person will agree to perform a given type of t.
isk whenever a given set of conditions occur; Uiat is, he will agree to perform a "function" Kor example, a buyer in a corporate prwurenicnt department may agree to issue a purchase order whenever a profKrrly executed purch.
isc request is received.
 Also, procedures are typically designed as methods for performing functions rather than individual tasks and are used whenever the function's task is to be done (e.
g.
.
 the procedure for issuing purch.
isc orders).
 Hence, in order to describe Uiose situations, we will gcncrali/e our discussion to include functions as well as tasks.
 As with tasks, one method available to a client for pcrfonning'a function is to csi.
iblish an agreement (a "function contract") with a contractor in which the coniracior commits to do the function for die client ["he contract *ill cimliiin an agreed upon description of Ihc function to be performed b> the contractor.
 Kor our discussion, wc will consider a function description to consist of a parametenzed task description and paraincten/cd set of prccimditions such that any given instance of Uic precondiiioiis defines an instance of the task.
 Whenever an instance of the preconditions becomes true, the contractor agrees to perform the corresponding instantiated task.
 As with tasks, the contr^ictnr's goal is to fulfill his commitment and the agreed upon function description provides him with a set of sufficient conditions for achieving that goal.
 r.
ach time the ftinction's preconditions become tnic the contractor can choose to do whatever actions he thinks will satisfy the client Note that in the transition from task to fiinction a new subtask has been introduced; namely, recognition of the occurrence of the preconditions.
 Hence, an agent who has committed to perform a function must establish monitors that recogni/.
c situations in which an instance of the function's task is to be pcrfonncd.
 Tasks and Functions in Infunnal Domains An agent performing a function depends on the function description to specify each situation in which he is to do something and in each of those situations Uic task thai he is lo perform In informal domains, use of those descriptions becomes problematic because of their inprccision and incompleteness (What is a "pioperly executed purchase request"?) |Suchinan|.
 hiencc, Ihe contractor is confronted with the new subtasks in each situation of interpreting the function description to delenninc whether a task is to be done, what the task would be, and then after doing something whether the lask has been accomplished.
 We claim in our model that the sole criteria for an acceptable intcipretation of these dcscriplions is agreeincnt by the contractor and client I'hal is, the function and task descriptions arc part of the contract between die contractor and client, and those agents are Uic final audionty as lo what those descriptions mean and whether they have been satisfied.
 For example, die meaning of "describe the items to be purchased" on a purchase requisition form is worked out in each case by tlie rcquisitioner and the procurement department buyer, for w h o m the description is being created.
 The interpretation of task and fiinction dcscriplions in any given situation is therefore a subject for negotiation between client and contractor.
 I'hal is.
 if a commitment description is not sufficiendy precise or complete for the contractor to dclemiine what he should do in a given situation, Uicn additional negotialions with die client are necessary.
 Hence, in infomial domains, Uie negotiation processes diat produce commitment descriptions continue during the fulfillincnt of those commiunents and become an integral part of die work required to ftilfill them.
 Agents performing functions in informal domains must be capable of determining appropriate interpretations of imprecise descriptions and of recognizing when the description is sufficiently inadequate to warrant renegotiation with die client W h e n agents are skilled in those capabilities, die difficult and time consuming process of creating comprehensive function and procedure descriptions can be avoided.
 Descriptions can be allowed to build up incrementally by generalizing die experiences gained in particular situations.
 Functions as Operators for Planning Functions play the same role as operators in standard Artificial Intelligence planning and problem solving frameworks (for example.
 Ilikcs and Nilsson)) in that they can be used by agents to achieve goals.
 W e said earlier ihat an agent w ho wants a lask done can cnlisi a second agent to do the lask by establishing a lask .
ngreemcnl with the second agent.
 I'unctions provide an alternative method of enlisting a second agent to do a task.
 I'hal is.
 if the second agent is a contractor who has made a commituncnt (it doesn't matter to w h o m ) to provide a function, and die task that die first agent ("the consumer") wants done is an instance of that function's lask.
 then Ihc consumer can cause Ihe contractor lo do the lask by persuading him that die appropriate insuince of the function's preconditions arc true.
 If the contractor refuses lo do the task, then die consumer can appeal lo the function's client, attempting to convince him dial the preconditions were satisfied and diat die contractor did not fulfill his cominilinent lo accomplish the task.
 For example, if an employee of a small company wants to obtain some equipment for use in his work, then he tan achieve dial goal by obtaining Ihe appropriate audiorizations and submiuinp die appropriate forms lo the company's procurement dcparutient.
 Ilie procurement department has made a commitment to the company president to be the contractor for the function of purchasing cquipniciu.
 and receipt of the appropriate forms and authorizations is the precondition for that function.
 Ihe employee becomes a consumer of that funcdon by convincing the contractor dial an instance of its preconditions have become true.
 If the procurement dcparlincnt refuses to provide the advance, the employee can complain lo the company president dial they are not performing their l\inction.
 18 In deciding to use a funclion.
 the consumer li.
is repriced his orieinnl lask MJih Jic ncA task of persuading the conirjclur to do Uie nrigiiwil l.
isk.
 Notice th.
il the method for accomplishing the nc» task is to con\mcc llic conlr.
iclor that an instance of the preconditions have been s.
ilisned, rather than simply to make an instance of the preconditions inic.
 ITic consumer is free to negotiate with the contractor as to what he will accept as satisfactory evidence that the preconditions are true.
 For example, the employee requesting an equipment purchase might convince the procurement depanmenl that a phone call from the employee's manager is sufficient in thai case to authorize the purchase.
 If tlie preconditions arc informal!) described, then there is tlie additional issue to he resolved in those negotiations of determining an agreed upon interpretation of the descriptions in the situation.
 For example, the employee might ask the procurement department to accept a m e m o requesting the purchase rather than the standard form.
 ITiis is another case where negotiations during the performance of a task arc vital to its completion and where variability is introduced by the onetime agreements that result from those negotiations.
 Subcontracting to Perform Tasks and Functions Consider again the basic situation in which a client wants a task done and lias obtained a commitment from a contractor to do the task.
 W e could then describe the comractors situation as one in which he wants a lask done, and that he has the option of persuading yet a third agent (a "subcontracior") to do some or all of the task for him.
 ITie subcontractor then is in the same situation and has an option to enlist a fourth agent, etc.
 ITic same description holds for functions as well as tasks.
 We are interested here in examining the role that the contractor's client plays in the work of a subcontractor.
 For that purpose it is sufficient to consider die three agent case where a contractor and client have an agrcciiiciil in which the contractor commits to pcrfonn a function, and i)ic coiuractor instead of performing the Function himself establishes an agreement witli a subcontractor in which the subcontractor commits to perforin the function.
 In ihat case, the contractor's client then becomes tlic consumer for the subcontractor's funclion.
 We can augment our purchasing example by considering the funclion contract between the company president and tlie employee.
 In that coniract.
 the president commits to purchase equipment for die employee whenever he submits an aiidiorized request.
 Instead of doing the puruhasmg himself tlie president contracts with the procurement dcp.
iilincnl to do il.
 Hence, a subcontracting relationship exists in which tlic employee is the consumer, the company president is the contractor, .
ind the pnxrurcmcni department is tlic subcontractor.
 Figure 1 indicates tlie structure of the two contracts that establish those relationships.
 Main luiiclinn Contract: Client: The employee Contractor: The company president Funclion Description: Purchase equipment for the employee whenever he submits an aulliori/cd request I'unclion Subcontract: ( licnl: llie company president ( onlraclor: llie procurement department ( oiisuiiur I'he employee luiHiion Di'scriplion: Purchase equipment for the employee whenever he subniiis an authorized request li(jurc I: Fxampic subcontracting situation in an oflicc Ilie contractor wants the function done in order to fulfill his cdinmilnK'Ml to the consumer.
 Ilic commiUiienl of the subcontractor to perloiiii the function can therefore be considered as being to fulfill the conlr.
icior's commitment to the consumer.
 Satisfaction of the consumer is a suffKient condition and impimant method for the siibcoiilractor to fulfill his commiUiienL (he siilKontniclor can therefore do whatever he thinks vvill convince the consumer that the contractor's commitment to him h.
is been fulfilled.
 The consumer therefore plays an important role in the subcontaclor's work and is an additional agent wiih w h o m the subcontractor can negotiate to determine what is required of him in a given situation.
 As before, if the work is being done in an infonnal domain, then determining agreed upon inicrpreutions of the descriptions in particular silualions is an additional issue for negotiation.
 If the subcontractor and the consumer agree im what is lo be dime, then the contractor need not enter into the negotiations or even know what was agreed on because his commitment to the consumer is being fulfilled and die commitment to him by the subcontracuir is being fulfilled.
 If i:i a given situation, the suhconiracior and consumer cannot agree on die task to be done, dicn diey both can appeal to the contractor for help.
 The subcontractor can argue that his commitment lo the contractor does not include what the consumer is asking for.
 and die consumer can argue that die contractor's commitment to him is not being fulfilled.
 Hence, the contractor needs lo enter into die negotiations only when the subcontractor and the consumer cannot agree.
 For example, when die employee requests the equipment purchase, die procurement department buyer may atieinpt to satisfy die employee by convincing him Uiat he should use previously purchased equipment or Uiat he should rent equipment H e may persuade the employee to help find an appropriate vendor, and in return agree to obtain die authorizations fiir die purchase that are normally part of die employee's responsibility.
 Such localized onetime agreements between agents occur regularly in office settings, and are an important aspect of the variability and adaptibility that characterize office work.
 Standard computer program description techniques (e.
g.
, flow charts) are hopelessly inadequate for describing such activity.
 So, we see diat the consumer is a source of information for the subcontractor about what is lo be done and an audiority on when the lask has been completed.
 Also, die consumer acts as a monitor for die contractor as to whether the subcontractor has done his job, since it is the consumer who cares whether or not ihe task is accomplished.
 Ilie interdepcndcncies among the consumer, contractor, and subcontractor discussed in diis secuon arc summari7.
cd in Figure 2.
 For the consumer: The subcontractor: Performs the desired lask.
 I'he contractor: Settles disputes widi the subcontractor.
 For the contractor: I'he subcontractor: Fulfills the commitment to the consumer.
 ITie consumer: Provides remuneration for doing die usk, and monitors the subcontractor's work.
 For the subcontractor: The consumer.
 Helps interpret die task description, and Indicates when die task is completed.
 Ihe contractor: Prov ides remuneration for doing the task, and helps settle disputes with the consumer.
 Figure 2: Summary of the Consumer, Contractor, Subcontractor Kclationships 19 Ihc Social Nalurc of I'roccilurcs Now cunsidcr a <;ilualion in which an agent has a runction he wants done ,ind a procedure describing how to do it.
 W c will call Ihc agent w h o h.
is the luMction "the procedure's in.
uiiger" and the function "the procedure's function" A prcKCdurc describes a method for doing a function in tenns of a collection of steps to be done in .
1 specified order, and Iheicby provides a means for tlic procedure's inanagei to organise a collection of agents to perform tlic procedure's fiinction.
 Miat is.
 the procedure's manager has the option for each step of the procedure of obtaining a coinmitincni from some oUur agent to do Ihc step (i.
e.
 of "installing the step").
 If he oht.
ilns such a coinmilmcni for each step of the procedure (i.
e.
.
 if he "installs the procedure"), then the agents w h o agreed to do the steps (i.
e.
.
 the "step contr.
ictors") will do the function for him.
 l'or example, if > piocurcmenl department manager is assigned (he function of purchasing equipment for employees, then he can either find or create a priKcdurc for performing tliat function and install the procedure by obtaining commitments froni the people in his department 10 be step contractors for each of tlie procedure's steps.
 In formal domains, operation descriptions can be provided for each step in a procedure that are guaranteed to satisfy the designer's intention for the step (e.
g.
.
 add x to y).
 Ilien tlie comruitment of a step contractor is to perform the step's operation in a manner that satisfies die formal description.
 I"he contractor need not have any model of the results expected from his step or of the role ihey play in performing the procedures task.
 His total sphere of concern is to perform the operation as specified.
 That is the style of procedure execution done, for example, by a typical programming language interpreter.
 In informal domains, there are no guarantees that a procedure will successfully accomplish its task.
 Those guarantees are lost because Uic procedure, its task, and tlie situations in which it will be used are \mprcc\sc\v described.
 Hence.
 prtKCdurcs in informal domains arc only provoiypcs ot mcvViods, tor pcrfomVing, lasVis.
 TVicy suggest a way of dccomposvTvg, a vask invo svcps, and perhaps indicalc h o w ihc task is typically perfonned, but they do not alleviate die need for problem solving in each specific situation to detenninc how to perform a task.
 Tlie user of an infomial procedure is confronted with the subproblcms of determining the meaning of the procedure in the specific situation and whedier it will be applicable or effective.
 A basic problem in informal domains with installing procedures to perfonn functions is that one must commit at the lime of installation to the decomposition specified by die procedure.
 If indeed as we argued above, that decomposition is only suggestive and needs 10 be reexamined each time the procedure is used, then the strategy of installing a procedure is an inetTective means of transfcring tlie work from the procedures manager to tlie step contractors Ihc ihallenge then is to describe and install prixedurcs in a manner that maximises Uieir adaptibillty and flexibility.
 Procedure Steps as i'unclions An important way of meeting the challenge of compensating for the inadequacies of inforin.
illv specified procedures is to add to the descnpiiiin of each step a description of the finKiion to be accomplished by that step (le.
.
 the goals to be aLliicicd and constraints 10 be maintained each time the step is performed), lor example, add to a step described as "Submit to procurement an aiithnri/cd purchase request" the function description "Whenever an employee wants eqiiipmenl purch.
iscd.
 achieve the goal: Procurement knows the employee wants equipment purchased and has the information and authorizations necessary to make the purchase".
 A function description spcciTies the requirements of a step without reference to huw those requirements are to be performed and therefore provides the option of using whatever method is appropriate in a particular situation to accomplish the function's task.
 The agent performing a step can use the function description to evaluate whellier the action described for the step is an appropriate method in a given situation, to plan alternative methods for performing the step, and to evaluate whether his actions accomplished the step.
 Adding function descriptions to steps results in procedures applicable to a widci ringe ctf situations bec.
iusc it allo\\s die agents performing the steps to lake into considcialion properties of the situation such as resource limit.
iiions and inler.
icuons with other Lisks that may not have been known at the time Uie procedure was designed, ihe work involved in using those function descriptions is significantly different from the work of pcrfomiing steps described as operations.
 In particular.
 It iiuolves subtasks of planiiiiin to delennine .
1 method to use, and inoiiiinrini; to determine whether the nietliod accomplished the function.
 However, an agent c.
ipable of effectively pcrfoiming those subtasks can belter dctennine the appropriaicness of his results and can successfully perform his step in unexpected situations li'ikcs).
 SuhcDiilrdcliiig l\'iiliin Procedures Our description of procedure insiallaiion thus far would predict that each tunc a procedure step is activated and the step contractor docs something other than die task described in his agreement with the procedure's manager, that the contractor must obtain an .
icknowledgcmenl from the managei that what he did silisfics his commitineni.
 In .
ictual practice in offices, there is a broad v.
ui.
ihiluy of behavior in ihe performance of procedure steps, and only rarely is diat behavior accompanied by iiitcraclion wnli the procedure's manager (typically the step contractor's supervisor).
 Instead, there are frequent negotiations among the agents doing die steps of the procedure.
 I'hosc agents arc not generally working for each other and have made no apparent commitments to e.
nh odier.
 H o w do wc explain Uieir negotiations and the role those interactions play in their work? In this section we model Uiosc inleractions by extending our description of procedure insUillation to include tlic subcontracting relationships that are established among the step contractors.
 Wc can apply our analysis of subcontracting to die performance of procedure steps by idenufying the comniilments made during a procedure installation and considering the "functional role" played by procedure steps A step's functional role is the rationale used by the priKcdurc designer for including the step in llic procedure (e.
g.
.
 achieve a goal of ihe procedure's task, salisfy a precondition of some oUier step in the prwedure).
 That rationale is therefore the defining basis for th« function to be performed at that step jVani^hn and Orown).
 Ilie funclion to be performed at e.
ich step of i procedure has a set of preconditions as pan of ius description.
 Ihc designer of a procedure must assure diat when a given step is to be perfonned.
 its preconditions are satisfied.
 I hat design goal is satisfied by including other steps earlier in the procedure that will cause those preconditions to be satisfied.
 'I'hc fiinctioiial role of those earlier steps, therefore, is to satisfy die preconditions of Uie later step.
 We can characterize a function's preconditions as consisting of "activation conditions", the (xrcurrcnce of which signals the contractor tliat an instance of the function's Uisk is to be done, and "enabling conditions", the satisfaction of which provides ihc context needed by the contr.
icior to perform die task.
 I'or example, the function performed by a buyer in a procurement department is activated when he receives a purchase request and is enabled when he receives audioriz^ation to make Uic purchase.
 W e distinguish, dierefore.
 between steps whose fiinctional role is to activate other steps and those whose role is to enable odier steps.
 Wc make use of that distinction in describing the contract that installs a pr(Kcdure step.
 That contract contains a commitment by the step contractor to perform die step's function whenever the step's activation conditions occur and a commitment by the procedure's manager to satisfy the step's enabling conditions whenever the activation conditions occur.
 I'or example, an accounting department clerk (the step contractor) may make a commiimcm to his manager (die procedure's manager) to respond to vendors' invoices whenever one is received.
 The manager would, in turn, agree to provide die clerk with the puixhasc order, packing slips, and other supporting documents needed to respond appropriately to die vendor.
 The procedure's manager satisfies his commitment to salisfy a step's enabling conditions by installing ihosc procedure steps whose functional role is to enable that step.
 Hence, an agent who is performing a step whose functional role is to enable some other step is in efTect a subcontractor whose consumer is the agent peifoiining the step he is enabling.
 In die accounung department example above, the agents who supply Ihe tlerk widi the supporting dixruments are subcontractors whose consumer is the clerk.
 20 file:///mprcc/sc/vOur earlier comments aboul the role that a consumer plays in Uie work of a suhconiracior therefore apply here.
 The agent doing the slop hcing enabled and the agent satisfying the enabling condition negotiate with each other to determine what the enabler's task is in problematic situations, and the procedure's manager is brought Into the negotiations only when they cannot agree.
 Also, the agent being enabled acts as a monitor on the enabler for the procedure's manager.
 The analysis of subcontracting applies to any procedure step whose functional role involves providing a result to some agent other than directly to Ihc procedure's manager.
 In those ca.
ses the agent providing the result is fulfilling a commitment made by the procedure's manager to the consumer of that result (or to a client of that consumer).
 Hence, the consumer and producer can work out together what is to be provided.
 We conclude from this discussion that an important way of increasing the adapiibilily of a procedure is to include in the description of each step the functional role of the step.
 If that functional role involves fulfilling a commitment of the procedure's manager to some third agent, then the description should include the identity of that agent, and tlie step contractor should have access to him for ongoing negotiations.
 Summary and Conclusions In this analysis we have described a framework that identifies the sources of variability and adaptibility observed in human cooperative work silualions.
 Our basic claim is that an agent's work is defined in terms of making and fulfilling commiuncnts to otiicr agents.
 Ilic tasks described in those commiunenis are merely agreed upon means for fulfilling tlie commitments.
 The agents involved in the agreement arc free in any given siiuaiion to decide how and whether a given commitment has been fulfilled Hence, nonstandard methods and outcomes may be considered acceptable even though they do not correspond to the described tasks, functions, and procedures.
 We claimed thai descriptions of tasks and functions result from negotiations between clients and contractors, and serve as agreed upon specifications of what the contractor is to do.
 In infonnal domains, those descriptions are necessarily incomplete and imprecise.
 Determining their intended meaning in specific situations is an important component of the work.
 ITiat determination involves continuing negotiations as situations and questions arise in which t))e meaning of Uie dccriptions is unclear.
 Procedures provide a means for organising a collection of agents to pcrfonn a function.
 In informal domains, procedures represent only prototypes of methods whose meaning and applicability in specific situations is unclear.
 Their use requires problem solving and negotiation to determine an effective method in a given situation.
 Information Needed To Do Cooperative Procedural Work This framework characterizes the information needed by agents doing cooperative work and the role that the information plays in their work.
 In general, it indicates that an agent needs descriptions of tlie task and function contracts lo which he has agreed, and the fiinclions available to him.
 For each Wsk or function commitment llial an agent has made, he needs to know the agreed upon task or function description (because it provides a set of sufficient conditions for fulfilling the commiunent), the agent to w h o m the commiunent was made (so iJial the contractor knows whose satisfaction he is trying to obtain), and tlie consumer of the results of the task or function in the case where the commitment is a subcontr.
ici (because salislying the consumer is a sufficient condition for fulfilling the comniiimcnt).
 An apcnl needs lo know the functions .
n.
iil.
iblc to him so that he can use thcin as steps in plans he forms to accomplish his tasks.
 In order to use a fiinclion, he needs a description of its task (so that he can deterininc whcllier the function can be used to accomplish his task), its preconditions (because they describe a mcins for iniii.
iling performance of the lask), Ihc identity of the contractor (so he will know who he must persuade to perform the task), and the identity of the client (so he will know wlui to appeal lo if he feels that the contractor is not adequately pcrroiiiiing Ihc fiinction).
 Information Needed From a Procedure Description We have also indicated information that is needed from the description of an informal procedure in order for the procedure to be used adaptivcly and fiexibly.
 The description should identify the procedure's manager (so that each step contractor knows whose satisfaction he is trying to obtain), and each step of the procedure should be described as a function (so that the step contractor can choose his own method of performing the step).
 If satisfaction of an enabling condition of a step is subcontracted to another step, then Uie description of the step being enabled should identify the enabling step and w h o is performing it (so that the contractor for the enabled step can negotiate with the enabler and monitor his performance).
 Finally, as noted above about all functions, if a step is a subcontract, then its description should identify the consumer of the subcontract (because satisfying him is a sufficient condition for fulfilling the commitment).
 Implications for Office Automation ITiis framework is serving as a basis for our exploration of how computerbased systems can effectively participate in procedural work in offices.
 W e have reported in earlier papers our preliminary results in this regard (|l'ikcs] and jfikes and Henderson)) and will not attempt lo describe our current efforts in detail here.
 Instead, we will conclude this paper with some general remarks on office automation to suggest the uses w e are making of the commitmentbased framework.
 Our discussion indicates Uiat in infonnal domains, "intelligent" capabilities such as planning, plan monitoring, and negotiation are required to do even simple cooperative work.
 Current computerbased systems that claim to automate such work in offices do not have those capabilities.
 They require precise descriptions of their function and how to perform it.
 'l"herefore.
 they can "commit" to doing only a foinializablc approximation of the function desired by the client.
 They arc incapable of performing the function in siuiations tliat do not match tlie assumptions of the formalization, and can not adapt their methods to account for unexpected features of a particular situation such as resource limitation changes or interactions with other tasks.
 In addition, they require more effort by the client to establish their task or function contract since they have no capability of interpreting vague descriptions and only very limited capabilities for recognizing situations where a description is inapplicable.
 All t(X) often, designers and installers of office automation equipment do not realize the unformalizable subtleties of the work being automated, and therefore do not anticipate the differences between what Uic equipment is going to do and what the people did w h o m it is replacing.
 Tliose differences often cause major upheavals in an organization because ihcy change the work requirements of all the agents w h o interact witli the equipment A major goal of tlie analysis described in this paper has been to provide a model of the unrormali7.
able aspects of office functions being overiooked by current automation efforts so that the differences in functionality introduced by the automation can be predicted and compensated for.
 Automation can increase productivity in an office by supporting, as well as replacing, people in their performance of office functions.
 For example, the framework we have described suggests ways of supporting office work by providing agents with the information they need when they need it.
 It also suggests a facilitator role for a computerbased system using knowledge of w h o the clients, contractors, and consumers arc for each task being performed.
 Hy knowing who must be satisfied by each result, a system would be able to monitor and track the performance of a task without needing lo understand the mediods being used or the semantics of the task itself.
 A c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s l.
ucy Suchman is a major participant in the research effort from which this paper emerges and has made significant contributions to the ideas presented herein.
 Also.
 I would like to thank Danny Dobrow.
 Austin Henderson.
 Tom Malone, Al Newell, and Kurt Vanlehn for providing valuable feedback and ideas in support of this paper.
 21 References Fikcs.
 R.
 "Aulomaling the Problem Solving in Procedural OfTice Work" In Proceedings of the A KIPS Office Aiiloiiialion Conrcrencc.
 Houston, Texas, March 1981.
 Hikes, K.
.
 and Henderson, A.
 "On Supporting the Use of Procedures in Office Work" Proceedings of ITie I'irsI Annual National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Stanford, Calif.
, August 1980, Fikcs, R.
, and Nilsson.
 N.
 "SI RIPS: A New Approach to the Application of ITieorem Pro\ing to Problem Solving".
 Artificial Intelligence 2 (1971), pp 189208.
 Flores, F.
, and l.
iidlow, J, "Doing and Speaking in the Office", In lick.
 C , and Sprague, R.
 (eds), DSS: Issues and Challenges.
 London: Pcrgamon Press, 1981.
 Smith.
 R.
 G.
 "A Framework for Problem Solving in a Distributed Proccssing Knvironmcnt".
 Dept.
 of Computer Science, Stanford Unn.
.
 Stanford, Calif.
 SIANCS787Q0 (HPP7828) Dec.
 1978, Smith, R.
 G.
.
 and Davis, R.
 "Frameworks for Cooperation in Distributed Problem Solving" IFHH Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Vol.
 SMCII.
 No.
 1, January 1981, Suchman, L.
 "Office Pr(x:edures as Practical Action: Theories of Work and Software Design" fo .
ippear in a special issue on Office Semantics of tJic lEHH Transictions on Software Fiigincciing.
 Vanl.
ehn, K.
, and Drown, J.
 S.
 "Planning Nets: A Representation for Formalizing Analogies and Semantic Models of PrtKcdural Skills", In Snow, R.
, Fredenco, P„ and Monuguc, W .
 (eds) Aplilude learning and Insiniiiion: Cogmiive Process Analyses.
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
: l.
awrcnce Krlbaum Associates.
 22 A COGNITIVE SCIENCE APPROACH TO IMPROVING PLANNING Barbara HayesRoth Rand Corporation Santa Monica, CA.
 90406 INTRODUCTION' Planning is the predetermination of an intended sequence of actions aimed at achieving a goal.
 We all engage in planning for a variety of goals, ranging from everyday goals like performing a set of errands to more consequential goals like making a career change.
 Whether or not we achieve our goals depends in part on the quality of our plans.
 During the past few years, my colleagues and I have been studying the cognitive processes people use for planning.
 When we began this work, most of the earlier scientific research on planning had focused on the development of automatic planning systems (e.
g.
, Fahlman, 1974; Pikes, 1977; Sacerdoti, 1974, 1975).
 Other research had examined the role of plans in human behavior (e.
g.
, Ernst & Newell, 1969; Miller, Galanter, & Pribram, 1969).
 However, little was known about the psychology of planning per sehow to identify effective planners, what special skills or strategies effective planners use, and what task factors impact on planning effectiveness.
 Because our longrange goal was to develop computer aids for human planners, we felt that understanding these psychological issues was an important first step.
 Accordingly, we embarked on a program of research designed to elucidate the cognitive processes underlying planning and to develop a computer aid that exploits cognitive strengths and compensates for cognitive weaknesses.
 Of course, there are many different kinds of planning, depending upon the number of planners involved, the planning environment, the type of goals under consideration, the action options, etc.
 For our research, we chose to focus on individual planning of multipletask sequences in a spatial environment.
 This task domain is welldefined and manageable.
 At the same time, it is general enough to apply to a variety of specific realworld planning tasks (e.
g.
, planning travel itineraries, planning delivery routes, planning factory inspections, planning tactical missions).
 For our research, we wanted an instantiation of this task that was both realistic and familiar to the people who would serve as subjects in our experiments.
 We chose the following errandplanning task: Given: a list of desired errands a map of the local environment starting and ending times starting and ending locations temporal constraints contextual information Plan: which errands to accomplish how much time to allocate for each errand in what order to conduct the errands by what routes to travel between successive errands.
 Our research program comprises the following tasks: 1.
 Develop a cognitive model of the planning process.
 2.
 Conduct experimental investigations of the model.
 3.
 Apply the model in studies of individual differences in planning skill.
 4.
 Apply the model in studies of planners' deficiencies and their vulnerabilities to task factors.
 5.
 Infer principles for improving planning performance.
 6.
 Design a computer aid around the inferred principles.
 7.
 Implement the computer aid.
 S.
 Test the computer aid in real planning environments.
 We have completed tasks 15 and have recently begun working on task 6.
 This paper summarizes our work to date.
 A COGNITIVE MODEL OF THE PLANNING PROCESS Our model of the cognitive processes underlying planning behavior exploits the theoretical architecture of the HearsayII speechunderstanding system (CMU Computer Science Research Group, 1977; Erman & Lesser, 1975; Lesser, Fennel, Erraan, & Reddy, 1975; Lesser & Erraan, 1977; HayesRoth & Lesser, 1977).
 It also incorporates principles developed in the research on automatic planning systems and on the role of plans in human behavior mentioned above.
 The model has three basic components: specialists, a "blackboard," and a control regime.
 Each of these is discussed briefly below.
 (See HayesRoth & HayesRoth, 1979, for a more detailed discussion of the model.
) Specialists Specialists are the mental processes that generate decisions for incorporation into the plan in process.
 For example, one specialist might generate a decision to establish a particular goal for the plan.
 Another might generate a decision to take a particular action toward achieving that goal.
 We operationalize specialists as conditionaction rules, similar to the production rules of Newell and Simon (1972).
 The condition part of the rule describes the circumstances under which the specialist can make a contribution to the plan.
 Ordinarily, the condition requires that some other planning decision has already been made.
 When that condition is satisfied, we say that the specialist has been "invoked.
" The action part of the rule describes the decision the specialist can contribute to the plan if it is "executed.
" We assume that a given individual possesses many planning specialists.
 Some of them are generic and can 23 make contributions to all planning problems.
 Other specialists are domainspecific and can make contributions only to planning problems in their particular domains.
 We also assume that the many specialists an individual brings to bear on a planning problem operate independently.
 They do not communicate or influence one another's behavior directly.
 However, they can communicate and influence one another's behavior indirectly, as discussed in the next section.
 The Blackboard The blackboard is a structured internal data base in which executed specialists record their decisions.
 All specialists can also inspect the blackboard and respond differentially to the presence of different kinds of information.
 In this way, specialists indirectly communicate and influence one another's behavior.
 The model partitions the blackboard into five conceptual "planes" that distinguish the different kinds of decisions we think planners make.
 The metaplan plane contains decisions about how to approach the problem, what kinds of problemsolving strategies to use, what kinds of policies should guide plan development, and what kinds of criteria should be used to evaluate tentative plans.
 The plan abstraction plane contains decisions characterizing the kinds of actions that should be included in the plan.
 The knowledge base plane contains data, assumptions, and knowledge about the world that might be useful in instantiating plan abstraction decisions.
 The plan plane contains decisions about the plan itself.
 These decisions are typically instantiations of plan abstraction decisions, based on information in the knowledge base.
 Finally, the executive plane contains decisions about how to sequence the e.
xecution of invoked specialists during the planning process.
 These decisions determine the order in which decisions are generated on the other planes of the blackboard.
 The model further partitions each plane of the blackboard into different "levels of abstraction.
" To illustrate, the plan plane has four different levels of abstraction.
 The outcomes level contains decisions about the goals of the plan.
 The design level contains decisions about the general spatialtemporal organization of the plan.
 The procedures level contains decisions about the actions planned within that spatial — temporal organization.
 The operations level contains decisions about the lowlevel operations necessary to carry out those actions.
 The other planes have similar levels of abstraction.
 The blackboard structure outlined above serves two functions.
 First, it embodies our model of the psychological categories of planning.
 Thus, it distinguishes our model from other planning models and provides one basis for evaluating the model's psychological validity.
 Second, the blackboard structure improves computational efficiency by permitting specialists to restrict their inspection activities to those areas of the blackboard likely to contain information of interest.
 Control Regime According to the model, planning proceeds in a series of "cycles.
" On each cycle, many specialists may be invoked.
 One specialist is scheduled to execute its action next.
 It does so, recording its decision at an appropriate location on the blackboard.
 The recording of a new decision signals the beginning of the next cycle.
 This process repeats until the planner has developed a satisfactory plan.
 The process of scheduling one of the invoked specialists on each cycle is another important feature of the model.
 Most previous conceptions of the planning process imposed upon it a strict, hierarchical control regime.
 Highlevel abstract decisions were made first and refined by later decisions at successively lower levels of abstraction.
 By contrast, our model assumes an opportunistic control regime.
 Specialists are scheduled and decisions generated in highly variable orders determined by competing scheduling heuristics.
 We have concentrated on two scheduling heuristics, focus of attention and recency.
 The focus of attention heuristic recommends scheduling specialists that record decisions in preselected areas of the blackboard.
 The recency heuristic recommends scheduling specialists that have been invoked recently, for example, on the last one or two cycles.
 (HayesRoth & Lesser (1977) have recommended other heuristics, such as efficiency and efficacy.
) We implement these heuristics by means of specialists that record relevant decisions on the executive plane of the blackboard.
 The interaction of the focus of attention and recency heuristics can manifest a variety of specific control strategies, including the hierarchical strategy mentioned above.
 We believe that the flexibility embodied in the opportunistic control regime is both a more accurate model of the variability we observe in human planning behavior and a more powerful approach to planning in general.
 EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONS OF THE OPPORTUNISTIC MODEL We coiiJucted two kinds of e.
\perimental investigations of the planning model: psychological experiments and computer simulation experiments.
 The psychological experiments provided support for several of the basic assumptions of the model, including the following: (a) that people make planning 24 decisions in each of the conceptual categories of the blackboard; (b) that people formulate plans at the postulated levels of abstraction; (c) that people develop plans with both topdown and bottoraup decision sequences; (d) that people effect alternative control strategies for planning; and (e) that people opportunistically exploit the information and constraints available during planning.
 (These experiments are discussed in detail in several reports: Goldin & HayesRoth, 1980; HayesRoth, 1980;HayesRoth & HayesRoth, 1979; HayesRoth & Thorndyke, 1980.
) The computer simulation was a LISP implementation of the model with about fifty specialists.
 The simulation served two functions.
 First, it demonstrated the sufficiency of the model to account for human planning behavior.
 The simulation produced plans and planning protocols similar to those produced by human planners.
 It also exhibited their characteristic strategic flexibility.
 Second, the simulation allowed us to explore some of the computational properties of the model, providing more general insights into distributed computation and heuristic control regimes.
 (The computer simulation is discussed in more detail in HayesRoth & HayesRoth, 1979, and in HayesRoth, HayesRoth, Rosenschein, & Cammarata, 1979).
 INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN PLANNING SKILL The first application of the opportunistic model was to individual differences in planning skillwhy are some planners more effective than others? The model suggests three areas in which effective planners might differ from ineffective planners: their generation of decisions in different areas of the planning blackboard, their flexibility in distributing attention among the different areas of the blackboard, and their repertoires of specialists.
 We evaluated these hypotheses by examining the planning processes of several planners with different skill levels.
 We assessed a planner's skill level based on the quality of the plans he or she produced.
 The quality of a plan was a composite score reflecting several interacting dimensions (e.
g.
, efficiency, constraint satisfaction, temporal realism).
 Planners who achieved high plan scores were designated effective planners; those who achieved low plan scores were designated ineffective planners.
 We then examined the planning process of effective versus ineffective planners as revealed in thinking aloud protocols.
 Basically, we asked subjects to verbalize :heir thoughts while they formulated plans.
 We then analyzed these protocols, classifying statements as representing particular planes of the blackboard or levels of abstraction.
 Finally, we examined the relationship between planning skill and the frequency with which planners made different kinds of decisions.
 The results supported all three hypotheses advanced above.
 Effective planners generated decisions in all areas of the planning blackboard, whereas ineffective planners generated primarily plan and planabstraction decisions.
 Effective planners also generated decisions at different levels of abstraction, whereas ineffective planners generated primarily lowlevel decisions.
 Effective planners showed greater attentional flexibility than ineffective planners.
 They more frequently shifted their focus of attention among the different planes of the blackboard and among different temporal loci within the plan itself.
 Finally, effective planners e.
xhibited many more specialists than ineffective planners and they seemed to exploit powerful specialists more actively.
 (These results are discussed in more detail in Goldin & HayesRoth, 1980.
) PLANNERS' DEFICIENCIES AND THEIR VULNERABILITIES TO TASK FACTORS We next applied the model to an analysis of general deficiencies in human planning and to the deleterious effects of task factors.
 Using protocol analysis methods similar to those described above, we identified three task factors that impede effective planning: constraints, complexity, and time stress.
 Planners seem able to accommodate one or two simple time constraints.
 However, as the number of time constraints in a problem increases, planning effectiveness deteriorates.
 Timeconstrained tasks, particularly those that appear late in the plan, rarely satisfy their constraints.
 The problem lies in planning strategy.
 The opportunistic model permits alternative planning strategies and, for heavily constrained problems, a constraintbased strategy is appropriate.
 Apparently, however, most of our subjects did not have a constraintbased strategy in their repertoires.
 Planners also have difficulty coping with increasing problem complexity.
 As the number of tasks under consideration and the number of alternative possible plans increase, planners require disproportionately longer times to generate satisfactory plans.
 This problem also seems to lie in planning strategy.
 Instead of adopting a strategy which would restrict attention to a small number of the most promising alternatives, our subjects appeared willing to consider new alternatives throughout a planning session.
 The third deficiency in human planning lies in the area of time estimation.
 Planners tend to underestimate the time required to execute planned actions and, as a consequence, to overestimate the number of actions they can execute in the available time.
 This tendency is exacerbated by time stress (the 25 time required to execute all the actions under consideration divided by the available time).
 Two factors contribute to this problem.
 Planners typically estimate time requirements at relatively high levels of abstraction.
 Because they fail to enumerate all timeconsuming components of an action, they systematically underestimate the time required to execute it.
 Planners also respond to strong motivational factors.
 Their strong desire to accomplish all or most of the tasks under consideration biases their time estimates toward underestimation.
 (These results are discussed in more detail in HayesRoth, 1980.
) PRINCIPLES FOR IMPROVING PLANNING PERFORMANCE Based on the opportunistic model and the empirical results summarized above, we developed the following principles for improving planning performance: Criteria for Selecting Planners 1.
 Largecapacity working memory.
 The opportunistic model describes people's tendency to "jump around" the space of possible considerations while forming plans.
 This suggests that it may be important for planners to have largecapacity working memories in order to keep track of several aspects of a developing plan simultaneously.
 2.
 Attentional flexibility.
 Our studies of individual differences in planning performance showed that good planners shift attention among different aspects of a planning problem more frequently than poor planners.
 Tlierefore, attentional flexibility may be another important characteristic of potential planners.
 3.
 Strategic flexibility.
 Our studies of topdown versus bottomup planning strategies showed the impact of particular planning strategies on the efficacy of the plans subjects produce and on the efficiency with which they produce them.
 In addition, some subjects appeared more willing than others to adopt alternative strategies.
 Therefore, strategic flexibility may be another important selection criterion.
 What to Teach Planners 4.
 Concepts of abstract plans, metacognitive decisions, executive decisions, and knowledgebase decisions.
 Our studies of individual differences showed that good planners made decisions in all categories of the planning blackboard, whereas poor planners made only certain kinds of decisions.
 In particular, highlevel abstract decisions, world knowledge decisions, metacognitive decisions, and executive decisions distinguished good planners from poor planners.
 Therefore, planners should be taught the roles of these types of decisions in the planning process.
 5.
 Domainspecific planning heuristics.
 Our studies of individual differences also showed that good planners had more different planning specialists than poor planners.
 Therefore, planners should be taught a variety of domainspecific planning heuristics.
 6.
 Costs and benefits of opportunism.
 There is considerable evidence that most people employ some amount of opportunism in the planning process.
 Opportunism provides planners freedom to examine various aspects of a problem, investigate alternative plan configurations, etc.
 This enables them to discover solutions that more rigid approaches would obscure.
 On the other hand, opportunism requires additional time and may lead planners down unproductive, as well as productive, solution paths.
 Planners should be taught these advantages and disadvantages and how to exercise controlled opportunism.
 7.
 General planning strategies.
 As mentioned above, different planning strategies are appropriate under different circumstances.
 Planners should be taught general planning strategies and the circumstances under which each is appropriate.
 8.
 Judgment and time estimation.
 Most people show a strong tendency to underestimate the time required for planned actions.
 As a consequence, their plans are unrealistic and overrun the time available for execution.
 Planners should be taught cognitive methods for making such judgments more reliably and more accurately.
 How to Train Planners 9.
 Provide explicit instruction.
 Explicit instruction appears to be a highly effective technique for training particular planning strategies and methods.
 10.
 Induce illustrative experiences.
 Many planners seem to be able to generalize what they learn from one planning problem to subsequent, similar planning problems.
 Therefore, general strategies and methods can be taught by instructing planners how to use them on specific problems and providing opportunities for them to generalize them to similar problems .
 J_l.
 Illustrate effective planning.
 Because our planning simulation effectively mimics the cognitive processes people use while planning, it may provide a useful model during training.
 The simulation could be programmed to illustrate planning strategies.
 26 Useful Aids for Planners Resource Estimation (See the following section.
) ONGOING RESEARCH As discussed in the introduction to this paper, we are particularly interested in developing computer aids to planning.
 We believe that, for the foreseeable future, people will pliy central roles in most important planning activities.
 Accordingly, an effective planning aid should exploit people's cognitive strengths and compensate for their cognitive weaknesses.
 We have recently begun working on the design of such an aid.
 Our work in this area focuses on a different instantiation of the same general planning task: project planning.
 We chose this task because it is an important realworld task that could benefit from the development of a planning aid and because we have contact with a variety of people who carry on project planning professionally.
 Our current design comprises the following components; Goal Formulation Our research suggests that planners suffer three deficiencies in the area of goal formulation.
 They do not formulate complete, well defined goals specifying all of the objectives, constraints, and policies the plan in progress should serve.
 They sometimes vacillate among conflicting goals, striving to satisfy different goals at different points in the planning process.
 They try to satisfy too many goals, given the available resources.
 The goal formulation component should help planners to articulate, prioritize, prune, and coordinate project goals.
 Product Specification Given a set of goals, the planner must generate functional specifications for project product(s).
 Presumably, development of these products would satisfy project goals.
 The problems in product specification are that planners may not generate complete specifications or they may not specify products that systematically satisfy project goals.
 The product specification component should help them to do so.
 Task Analysis Given a set of specifications, the planner must specify a set of project tasks whose execution would implement planned project products.
 Again, the problems are that planners may not generate a complete set of tasks or analyze them at a sufficiently low level of abstraction or that they may not specify tasks that systematically implement project products.
 The task analysis component should help them to do so.
 For each task under consideration, the planner must determine what resources are required to execute it.
 Our research suggests that planners are unduly optimistic about the number of tasks that can be accomplished with given fixed resources.
 The resources estimation component should help planners realistically assess the resource requirements of tasks under consideration.
 Resource Al loc.
:Lion Given limited resources and alternative goals, the planner must determine how to allocate the available resources.
 Our research suggests that planners tend to spread resources too thinly across too many goals.
 The resource allocation component should help planners to formulate realistic allocation schemes and to perform cost/benefit analyses of alternative allocation schemes.
 Scheduling The planner must schedule planned tasks in a way that provides adequate time for the execution of each task, insures completion of prerequisites by the time they are required, and minimizes slack time and other costs.
 The scheduling component should support these activities.
 Evaluation Our research suggests that poor plan evaluation is a major impediment to effective planning.
 Poor planners do very little systematic evaluation of their tentative plans.
 Even good planners frequently decide arbitrarily among two or three final contenders.
 The evaluation component should at least assess whether the final plan meets criteria articulated by the planner.
 It should also assess the efficacy, efficiency and robustness of the plan in a simulated environment.
 During the next few years, we plan to refine this design, implement it as a computer system, and evaluate its utility in the context of several Rand projects.
 REFERENCES C.
MU Computer Science Research Group.
 Summary of the CML' Fiveyear ARPA Effort in Speech Understandng Research, Technical Report, CarnegieMellon University, 1977.
 Erman, L.
D.
 and V.
R.
 Lesser.
 "A MultiLevel Organization for Problem Solving Using Many Diverse Cooperating Sources of Knowledge," Proceedings of the Fourth International Joint Conference on 27 Artificial Intelligence, Tbilisi, USSR, 1975, 483490.
 Ernst, G.
W.
 and A.
 Newell.
 GPS: A Case Study in Generality and Problem Solving, New York: Academic Press, 1969.
 Fahlman, S.
E.
 "A Planning System for Robot Construction Tasks," Artificial Intelligence, 1974.
 5, 149.
 Fikes, R.
E.
 "Knowledge Representation in Automatic Planning Systems," In A.
K.
 Jones (ed.
).
 Perspectives on Computer Science.
 New York; Academic Press, 1977.
 Goldin, Sarah and Barbara HayesRoth.
 Individual Differences in Planning Processes, N14880NR, The Rand Corporation, June, 1980.
 HayesRoth, Barbara and Frederick HayesRoth.
 "A Cognitive Model of Planning," Cognitive Science, 1979, 3, 275310.
 HayesRoth, Barbara and Frederick HayesRoth.
 Cognitive Processes in Planning, R2366, The Rand Corporation, December, 1978.
 HayesRoth, Barbara and Perry W.
 Thorndyke.
 Decisionmaking During the Planning Process, N1213ONR, The Rand Corporation, October, 1980.
 HayesRoth, Barbara.
 Estimation of Time Requirements During Planning: Interactions Between Motivation and Cognition, N1581ONR, The Rand Corporation, November, 1980.
 HayesRoth, Barbara.
 Flexibility in Executive Strategies, N1170ONR, The Rand Corporation, September, 1980.
 HayesRoth, Barbara.
 Human Planning Processes, R2670ONR, Rand Corporation, December, 1980.
 HayesRoth, F.
 and V.
R.
 Lesser.
 "Focus of Attention in the HearsayII Speech Understanding System," Proceedings of the Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Boston, Mass.
, 1977, 2735.
 Lesser, V.
R.
, R.
D.
 Fennell, L.
D.
 Erman, and D.
R.
 Reddy.
 "Organization of the HearsayII Speech Understanding System," IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, ASSP23,1975,1123.
 Miller, G.
A.
, E.
 Galanter, and K.
H.
 Pribram, Plans and the Structure of Behavior, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
, 1960.
 Newell, A.
 and H.
A.
 Simon.
 Human Problem Solving.
 Englewood Cliffs, N.
J.
.
 PrenticeHall, 1972.
 Sacerdoti, E.
D.
 "Planning in a Hierarchy of Abstraction Spaces," Artificial Intelligence, 1974, 5, 115135.
 Sacerdoti, E.
D.
 A Structure for Plans and Behavior.
 Technical Note 109, Stanford Research Institute, Menlo Park, California, August, 1975.
 28 Everyday Problem Solving James A.
 Levin Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition University of California, San Diego This paper was generated through the distributed social processing of the Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, with special help from Denis Newman, Naomi Mlyake, Bud Mehan.
 Ed Hutchlns, Peg Griffin, Hike Cole, and Harcla Boruta.
 Financial support was provided by The Spencer Foundation.
 Abstract Everyday problem solving is different in significant ways from the kinds of problem solving that take place in laboratory mlcroworld settings.
 Attempts to simplify have excluded important factors that can help us understand aspects of the problem solving that are problems from the point of view of the laboratory.
 This paper describes several research projects that have examined problem solving in nonlaboratory settings, and some of the Implications of these studies for cognitive science.
 The current notions of distributed cognitive processing can be extended in a powerful way to the socially distributed problem solving characteristic of everyday settings.
 This notion of socially distributed problem solving can then reflect back on Individual problem solving, which which is acquired and often carried out in social settings.
 Someone walks Into your office and asks you to rprommend a paper to read as an introduction to research on children's problem solving.
 You discuss with the person exactly what she wants to know, you walk over to your bookshelf to look for an appropriate book, you call a friend on the phone who might know.
 All very unexceptional, yet imagine that the person didn't allow you to discuss with her exactly what she wanted to know, to go to your bookshelf or call on the phone, but instead required you to answer her question without these external resources.
 In everyday circumstances you would throw her out of your office.
 Yet these are exactly the constraints of the laboratory microworlds within which problem solving is studied.
 Recently a number of research groups have been studying problem solving in nonlaboratory settings.
 This work has some important implications for cognitive science: it serves to reinforce the findings concerning the role of expertise in human problem solving and expert artificial intelligence systems, and this nonlaboratory work extends beyond the current problem solving research, pointing to ways to enrich both models of human problem solving and expert Inference systems.
 Expertise.
 Recent research on expert problem solving has highlighted the large amount of domain specific knowledge and cognitive processes that constitute oxperlise (Chase & Simon, 1973; Larkln, McDermott, Simon, * Simon, 1980).
 These studies of human problem solving have been parallelled by the development of artificial intelligence "expert" systems, which are also characterized by a focus on domain specific knowledge and inference processes.
 This work contrasts with the early work on problem solving, both in psychology and in computer science, which postulated a few all powerful general problem solving processes, that would operate over a large passive data base.
 These "central processor" models have been displaced by various "distributed" data base and processor models, with multiple concurrent prorosses that interact to produce complex procersing.
 The domain specific focus of expert knowledge has been reinforced by studies of everyday problem solving.
 For example, a group of researchers at the University of California, Irvine have been examining the ways that ordinary adults use arithmetic knowledge while grocery shopping (Lave, 1980; De la Roeha, Hurtaugh, & Lave, 1981).
 Schools spend many years teaching us general purpose algorithms that can be used during shopping to calculate comparative prices.
 Yet most of their observations show that people ordinarily use special purpose heuristics while shopping.
 Even In this mundane everyday setting, people have developed "expertise" to carry out this task, domain specific methods that bear little resemblance to the general purpose computational skills taught in school.
 Similar research by Scrlbner and her associates (Scrlbner, 1981) reinforce this finding of special purpose expertise In everyday functioning.
 They studied the work in a dairy warehouse, examining the use of computation in filling orders and determining total prices.
 The experts in this domain had developed special purpose algorithms to allow them to function efficiently in this domain.
 Problem Solving vs.
 Routine Functioning.
 What is the relation between expertise and problem solving? Problem solving is not Just accomplishing particular kinds of tasks labeled as "problems".
 The processes involved in solving most puzzles are different the second time you solve them (when you know the answer) than the first time.
 In fact, "expertise" can be defined as the knowledge and cognitive skills that allow a person to perform routinely what other people would have to do through problem solving.
 Central to the definition of problem solving is the notion of a "blocked condition" (Hutchlns & Levin, 1981).
 Derived from the Gestalt studies of problem solving (Kohler, 1925), this occurs when a problem solver is unable to achieve some goal, after repeated attempts to do so.
 Problem solving is the cognitive processing that occurs when a problem solver is blocked.
 Routine functioning is the processing that occurs when unblocked.
 Studies of everyday problem solving.
 Several research groups have examined how people deal with these blocked conditions in nonlaboratory settings.
 Suchman (1980) did an ethnographic study of problem solving in an office setting, setting down a detailed account of accounting practices, especially those Involved in dealing with nonstandard cases.
 Even In the mundane workaday office setting, the execution of explicit instructions remains "irremediably problematic", requiring Interactive work on the part of the participants.
 Levin & Kareev (1980) examined the problem solving of children in computer clubs.
 In both these studies, a critical component of the problem solving, which is largely absent from laboratory studies, is the conceptual organization of the task, determining what the problem IS, what are the goals and constraints to be satisfied, what actions are available.
 The second major difference between laboratory problem solving and everyday problem solving is the much more important role played by external resources, those outside the individual problem solver.
 The laboratory setting is relatively sterile of help and the experimenter works to keep it that way.
 A standard experiment would not be run In the middle of a busy room.
 Given a puzzle to solve, it is not considered proper for the subject to ask a friend what the answer Is.
 However, when a person encounters a problem in everyday life, asking someone what to do Is usually appropriate.
 The use of social resources is probably the biggest single difference between standard laboratory settings and everyday settings.
 One of the common strategies used by adultf when faced with an 29 arithmetic problem in an eveyday setting Is to ask someone what the answer Is (Lave, 1980).
 In computer clubs, children help and ask for help effortlessly to get beyond minor blocks so that they can get on with their play (Levin K Kareev, 1980).
 Division of labor.
 One of the most Important ways that people use social resources for problem solving Is by organizing a division of the work Involved.
 When faced with a new computer game, children divide up the task so that no child Is overwhelmed while the game gets played.
 One child will type In the required responses, another will take over the generation of guesses, others will evaluate and modify the guesses (Levin & Kareev, 1980).
 This process of organizing and executing a division of labor is so effortless and smooth that repeated viewing of video taped instances is required to see it at all.
 Socially distributed problem solving.
 An important contribution of cognitive science to the study of everyday problem solving are the frameworks for distributed processing.
 Using this new processing "language", researchers can now talk about the social distribution of problem solving in many situations, characterizing the nature of each processor and the kinds of interactions that occur (LCHC, 1981; Mehan, 1981).
 Issues of conflict resolution and information integration, central Issues for distributed processing, are also critically important for models of socially distributed problem solving.
 Yet this contribution Is not a oneway street.
 The study of problem solving that is distributed over several people can suggest hypotheses about how the same process might be organized cognltively when performed by a single person.
 A major issue for any cognitive model is what is the structure of the knowledge and processes, what are the units and subunits.
 The division of a problem that can be solved distributed across several people provides an existence proof that the problem can successfully be organized that way.
 Researchers can then carry out empirical tests of whether an individual in fact does organize the task that way.
 Aquisition of expertise.
 A second contribution of this approach to everyday problem solving Is to deal at least partly with the Issue of acquisition.
 Current research on the acquisition of problem solving skills and domain specific expertise has concentrated on independent invention (Langley, 1980; Lenat, 1977).
 let models that depend totally on independent invention of knowledge and processes never get very far.
 It remains a major puzzle how such systems could acquire the huge amounts of domain specific knowledge needed by experts.
 A way to overcome this block was pointed out by D'Andrade, in his invited address at the previous Cognitive Sciences Meeting (1980): people acquire knowledge and skills from other people.
 We are socialized within a rich culture, where the people and objects are at least partially organized specifically to help novices become experts in the domains Important for functioning In the world.
 Children are taught the important facts of life; beginners are trained to becone experts.
 From this point of view, the acquisition of expertise can be characterized as the progressive internalization by the learner of socially distributed processing.
 A person generally becomes an expert in a setting where he/she can gradually take on more and more of the effort in handling tasks that experts in the domain handle.
 Children who are novices at a computer game initially divide the task over several children and adults.
 Gradually, each child takes over more and more functions, so that fewer children have to cooperate to accomplish the task.
 Finally a child can play the game alone.
 This progressive acqulstion of a process initially distributed socially in fact can provide a rationale for the way that the cognitive processes are distributed within an individual expert, a distribution that allows the expert to draw smoothly upon social resources whenever problems arise.
 \»eterencea Chase, W.
 G.
, K Simon, H.
 A.
 PerceptVon in clness.
 Cognitive Psychology, 1973, n, 5561.
 De la Rocha, C, Murtaugh, M.
, & Lave, J.
 A conceptual framework for locating cognitive processes in everyday life.
 To appear in J.
 Lave 4 B.
 Rogoff (Eds.
), Everyday cognition: Its development in social context.
 Cambridge, HA: Harvard University Press, in press.
 D'Andrade, R.
 G.
 The cultural part of cognition.
 Paper presented at the Second Annual Cognitive Science Conference, Yale University, 1980.
 Cognitive Science, in press 1981.
 Hutchlns, E.
 L.
, 4 Levin, J.
 A.
 Point of view in problem solving.
 Paper presented at the Third Annual Cognitive Science Conference, U.
 C.
 Berkeley, 1981.
 Kohler, W.
 The mentality of apes.
 Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1925.
 London: Langley, P.
 Datadriven discovery of physical laws.
 Cognitive Science, 1981, 5, 315'4.
 Lave, J.
 What's special about experiments as contexts for thinking.
 The Quarterly Newsletter of the Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, 1980, 2, 8691.
 Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, UCSD.
 Culture and intelligence.
 In R.
 Sternberg (Ed.
), Handbook of intelligence.
 New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
 Larkin, J.
, McDermott, J.
, Simon, D.
P.
, 4 Simon, H.
A.
 Expert and novice performance in solving physics problems.
 Science, 1980, 208, 13351312.
 Lenat, D.
 B.
 Automated theory formation in mathematics.
 Proceedings of the Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
 1977, 8338'J2.
 Levin, J.
 A.
, 4 Kareev, Y.
 Problem solving In everyday situations.
 The Quarterly Newsletter of the Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, 1980, 2, 1752.
 Mehan, H.
 Practical decision making in naturally occurring institutional settings.
 To appear in B.
 Rogoff 4 J.
 Lave (Eds.
), Everyday cognition: Its development in social context.
 Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, in press.
 Newell, A.
, 4 Simon, H.
 A.
 Human problem solving.
 Englewood Cliffs, NJ: PrenticeHall, 1972.
 Scrlbner, S.
 Studying working intelligence.
 To appear in J.
 Lave 4 B.
 Rogoff (Eds.
), Everyday cognition: Its development in social context.
 Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, in press.
 Suchman, L.
 Office procedure as practical action: Theories of work and software design.
 Paper presented at the Workshop on Research In Office Semantics, Chatham, Massachusetts, June 1980.
 30 Marriage is a DoItYoursclf Project: The Organization of Marital Goals Naomi Quirm Duke IMivereity In the story understanding 111erature,a class of stories which is on Its way to becoming something of a famous example, has to do with getting married.
 One typical variant, used by Wllensky (1978: 67), goes like this: John was tired of frequenting the local singles' bar.
 He decided to get married.
 The point of this story is that to understand how getting married could possibly replace going to a singles' bar, the reader must know that a state such as marriage can subsume goals that arise repeatedly.
 In this case the goal is SatlsfySEX.
 A series of variants of this story, however, demonstrate that marriage may in fact subsume a variety of such recurring goals: John was feeling lonely every evening.
 He decided to get married (Wilensky ibid.
; 72).
 Mary was tired of working for a living.
 decided to quit her job and get married (Wllensky ibid.
: 77).
 She Schank and Abelson Introduce two other variants (1977: 126) to Illustrate a further characteristic of goal subsumption: After his marriage with Mary broke up, John began frequenting the local singles' bars.
 After his marriage with Mary broke up, John decided to join a chess club.
 To understand these stories we need to realize, Schank and Abelson (Ibid.
) say, that "goals that arise via subsumption tend to subsume more than a single goal.
" "Being married," they note, "can subsume the sex urge goal, goals of social stimulation, the desire to have children, to have power over another person, or to be with a loved one.
" Wllensky (Ibid.
: 77) views this tendency to goal multiplicity as a distinctive property of social relationships: Since there Is typically more than one obligation imposed upon the member of a relationship, social relationships usually subsume more than one goal.
 For example, being married to someone usually subsumes a number of recurring goals in addition to those for which money Is instrumental.
 Since being married obligates each partner to have sex with the other, and since having a willing partner Is a precondition for having sex, then marriage subsumes the recurring Satlsfysex goal.
 Also, since marriage requires the partners to live together, then it subsumes the recurring Enjoycompany goal to which being near a loved one is instrumental.
 These examples promote a certain view of social relationships as bundles of discrete goals which happen, perhaps because of cultural convention, to be packaged together.
 As Schank and Abelson (Ibid.
: 127) summarize, "Each social relationship carries with it a packet of goals.
" This paper is offered as an alternative to that particular view of goals and social relationships.
 It argues that marital goals are not so much packaged together as highly organized, and that what organizes them Is an underlying model of marriage which, far from being fixed and conventional.
 Is constructed by the Individual In the course of the relationship.
 Perhaps the best way to Introduce this view of the organization of goals Is to quote some statements by Alex, an Interviewee of mine, on the subject of his marriage.
 Talking about his preconceptions of marriage, he says, 6H1: Well yeah 1 thought it was all going to be wonderful.
 You know it was—the problern of sex was going to be solved.
 You know I was an adolescent or barely out of adolescence, you know—this was a wonderful idea.
 And, I don't know.
.
.
you know—the Idea—and—you really—you're asking some good questions because there really are some things that I knew about and that I wanted.
 A companion and friend.
 Probably the most.
 You know, the things that I did want and I got out of the marriage.
 That seemed Important then—to have someone there all the time that you could rely on.
 And talk to all the time about things.
 Somebody to help and somebody to help you, you know, that seemed like a real good idea.
 That seemed like something I really wanted.
 It seemed like something that we got out of the marriage.
 Somebody always there.
 In a second Interview, he goes back to this issue: 6H2: I think, right from the very beginning, I believe I mentioned on the other tape that I felt the—talking about the—what was—did you expect getting married that I did feel a need for a companion and somebody to be with me and to fulfill something that was empty, I didn't know what it was.
 And I think that might have been the first step—the first stage of love.
 But now I'd say that love is, to me, is the desire to give more to the other person than you're giving to yourself, at times.
 You know it's the, not only willingness to accept the part of marriage where you have to change and adjust, but a strong desire to do so.
 Not only the willingness to accept that there are times when the other part—person or partner might need some help.
 But the desire to give help.
 To that person.
 The sort of love of the fulfilling the other person's needs.
 Later in the same Interview, talking about why some of the couples they had been thrown together with in the Navy had marital difficulties: 6H2: Therewere certain things they married for.
 They'd gotten which it may have been their dinner on the table every night and, you V.
no«, a warm body next to you in bed.
 Knd It suddenly went beyond that.
 It suddenly got into conversation.
 And support, things of that sort.
 And that's—that caused some difficulties.
 In a later interview, he describes giving advice to a Navy shipmate: 6H^: And he said he was going to get married and I said, "Well," I said, "I hope you think about it real hard because I think you might find marriage to be a little bit surprising than what It is.
 Because it was for me.
 Shocking sometimes, you know, that it wasn't all love and sex and that's it.
 Yeah, that there was some work to be done.
" The first thing to be said about the '"goal subsumption" model of ro.
Trriage, then.
 Is that It Is a folk model.
 The reason why we understand marriage as subsumption of a particular set of goals, is not because social relationships necessarily subsume multiple goals, but because the goal subsumption model of marriage Is a very common preconception in our society.
 Tt is not.
 31 however, the only myth about marriage; another, subcultural one.
 Is expressed In the following segments from Interviews with another husband, 2H7: The marriage thing, I think basically, is Just a mental thing where you know, you've heard so many things about marriage like It's— marriage have become something like a negative thing.
 You know, a lot of people, you know, you know, it's Just—you just hear so much, you've never been married so you don't know.
 You know you Just hear so many things about when you're married, you know, things really change.
 Your wife don't let you go out or, you know, your husband don't let you go out and, you have to—you know, you never have any money, you can't spend money on what you want to.
 You know you hear so many things— when you get married your wife don't want you sexually anymore or you don't want your wife and you have to be sneaking here and there trying to do things.
 You know, these are things that you hear and because of all this, you know, you know, it's like you have a — it's Just like you sort of take caution and say, "Well let's try it out first and then we'll"—you know— You hear it all your life from a kid on up and from various people.
 2H7: Your wife won't let you out and—or you got to be doing something.
 You got to keep the baby, you're babysitting, you know.
 And they say things like, "You're babysitting while your wife is out in the streets, you know, playing around.
" Or you know, you know, they put a lot of, you know, it's a lot of fears being—it, you know, it be a lot of fears—a lot of things that people—you know, it's just constantly, you know.
 2H7: You know, so it's Just something constantly you know.
 It's like something— like it's the end of the road, you know, to get married.
 It's like you—you're just crazy.
 You're out of your mind, you know.
 2H7: Okay, I'm single, okay and I'm going out and maybe one of my—somebody I know a buddy or somebody that's married.
 Okay, you hear from women and men.
 Okay, and you're single and people tell you, "Oh, you're so lucky.
" You know, you know, 'You're single and you can go out here and see all these women you want to see, you know, anywhere— you know, you're just—you're living the life, you know, and they're making you feel like, "God," you know, "Marriage is like the end of everything," you know.
 Marriage, In this view of Jimmy's does not so much solve the problem of sex as create it: 2H7: Marriage or whatever it is—it's a sex thing, you know.
 You got to—your sex got to be cooking all the time, you know, or else, you know, you ain't doing nothing, you know.
 And you're wife may essential—or whoever may Just leave you because, you know—or you may have to leave, you know, your wife or your woman because—or go for somebody that's, you know, that things are rolling, you know.
 This is what society has put into you.
 Because of this very strong stereotype he has been taught, Jimmy decided he is never going to get married, 2H2: I wouldn't want anything like a marriage to Interfere with my normal way of living.
 I wouldn't want to Interrupt my life to be—you know, maybe because I feel like I would probably be unhappy because no woman would really give me, maybe, the freedom that 1 need.
 Jlnmy's model might be dubbed the "goalfrustration" model of marriage.
 Our cultural knowledge of this model should assist us in understanding stories such as, Jimmy wanted his freedom.
 He decided not to get married.
 or Jimmy did not want to feel like he had to keep sex cooking all the time.
 He determined never to get married.
 The reallife excerpts above are taken from Interviews with two husbands in a larger study, during which each spouse in eleven marriages has been interviewed for an average of 1516 hours apiece.
 Interviewees describe their preconceptions of marriage, and make clear In the course of these extended interviews what they think their marriages turned out to be.
 To Illustrate how goals are organized by these understandings of marriage which emerge in the course of it, I would like to provide a somewhat extended analysis of Alex's conceptualization of his marriage, which 1 will then compare with a somewhat briefer look at another marriage.
 First of all, Alex sees his marriage as a joining together of two people, expressed more specifically in two metaphors he uses again and again: MARRIAGE IS BEING A COUPLE and MARRIAGE IS A PERSON.
 The first of these metaphors is characteristic of his descriptions of the early period of his thirteenyear marriage, for example in this remembrance of the decision to have a child while he was in the Navy: 6H1: After I got the first promotion with the idea that the second one might be coming.
 I think that's how it was and that was quite successful because Shirley got pregnant right away.
 And she, you know, when I got back from Guantanamo she told me and we told the news to everybody and it was a really big deal.
 And I think that the apartment and the baby and all of that stuff really began to come down on us, you know, and we started believing that we were truly a couple.
 And we were truly a family and really married.
 Here the equation between being married and being a couple is explicit; and being a couple is also equated with being a family.
 All three continue to be used interchangeably throughout Alex's interviews.
 The first identity is explored in the following remarks about a couple they knew in the Navy: 6H2: You know it's funny there's even a couple that we got to know in Iceland that were Just dating there, they Just met there.
 One of the teachers and a fellow that was up there who didn't get married for years, but did later.
 I mean they went off on their own—he went further—he went out to the West Coast and got a ship.
 She went to Okinawa to teach.
 And they eventually got married.
 And we knew them very well, and were close to them and they were just dating then.
 And they ended up getting married and having a very solid marriage, now with a child.
 And we see them, they lived in Okinawa for a while and then they went to Germany.
 And that's another— it's amazing how that happened.
 32 I: Why? 6H2: Well that—I still feel like—I still— I knew them as a couple, even then.
 You know I always saw then as a couple, even though they really—they weren't In the same relationship as the other couples that we knew, but they ended up that way.
 What's amazing is how that couple formed the same sort of marriage that the other married couples that we knew already had.
 Alex is amazed that his perception of them as a married couple turned out to be accurate.
 The second equation, between being a couple and being a family is elaborated further in this segment: 6H1: That, you know, we were now a family.
 Just the two of us, we were a family, and that—and the commitment was to make that family move.
 You know, that it was going to be a solid thing—you know It vas going to be a—you know just like the parents' had been— they were—and all the people we knew, around us.
 Remember of course that this mass divorce thing which is going on now, hadn't—was not going on then.
 This was—we got married in '67, 1 guess It was.
 January '67.
 A couple is a family.
 This excerpt also Introduces a goal—to make that family move.
 The juxtaposition of this observation with the comments about contrasting marriages back then with the mass divorce of the present time makes clear that what Alex means by a family that moves is a marrlajie which does not end in divorce.
 Thus one goal of BEING A COUPLE (and hence a family) is permanence.
 This excerpt also hints at how that permanence is to be attained—an issue which will be taken up below.
 The COUPLE metaphor Is associated not only with the goal of permanence, but also with the further goals (Preservation Goals, in Schank and Abelson's ibid.
: 115116) of exclusivity, proximity, and shared experience.
 The first of these goals emerges in Alex's descriptions of several incidents early in the marriage, revolving around his wife's fllrtatlousness and untoward Interest in men.
 Alex has this to say: 6H1: 1 think I decided It was time for Shirley to stop fooling around with any other guys.
 And that [GETTING HARRIED) was the one way 1 thought I could convince her to do that.
 Other than that she was going to party for the rest of her life.
 from which it is clear that being married implies exclusivity.
 The relationship between BEING A COUPLE and exclusivity Is still clearer in another striking passage about his response to her emotional tie to her parents: 6H1: I think it was significant because you know I made a very strong decision then and, you know, we—Shirley went along and I think that was one of the first times that I had said, "I'm going to separate you from your parents.
" In a very decisive manner and "This Is what we're going to do.
" And you know, "You're going to follow me here, you're going to go with me here as your husband.
" Maybe It was, you know—looking back on that I—maybe that seems—sounds a little chauvinistic but 1 think It was a declaration that we have a marriage and it's just two of us in this marriage not four.
 This segment offers an unusually clear glimpse Into the internal logic by which a goal follows from a metaphor— probably because Alex is here recapping the very argument which he used to persuade his wife.
 Thus "we have a marriage" sets out the initial assumption; "it's just the two of us in this marriage" establishes the identity of a "marriage" with a "couple"; "not four" Is a logical inference following from "just the two of us," and in turn supplies a reason for the goal of exclusivity, here to be realized by separating her from her parents.
 Such a chain or reasoning Is not often made explicit in these descriptions of marriages; rather, the link between a given marital metaphor and a given marital goal must often be inferred from their juxtaposition, from more scattered pieces of logic which can be pieced together to relate them, and from their recurrence and emphasis as common themes in a given individual's interviews.
 Thus, it does not surprise us to learn that Alex repeatedly stresses the further goal of proximity.
 Talking about their decision whether or not to accept .
> post in Iceland, a station which provided housing for families, he says: 6H2: I think if you're separated by necessity, if there is no choice about it, that's one thing.
 Then you become—you know, you're tied together by your letters and you're both fighting it.
 And that's a different thing.
 But to be given a chance—to be told that you may stay together that everything had been cleared, that we had a place.
 It had all been settled, and then to say, "I'm not going to go.
" That would have been a breach of the faith of the marriage.
 It would have been hard to overcome.
 Choosing to stay together at every opportunity Is a consequence of the proximity goal; and maintaining ties during forced separations is an attempt to overcome the circumstances which prevent proximity.
 Letterwriting was a major shipboard activity during his overseas trips in the Navy; and nowadays, on business trips, he makes long dally phone calls home.
 While separations can be "fought" in these ways, a marriage may not be able to sustain extremely lengthy ones: 6H2: But I thought that would be two years like that [APART] would have done severe damage to our marriage.
 I think it would, you know, it would have done severe damage and if we weren't the same people that we are right now that might have happened.
 And that there Is one of the weakening things of a trip overseas like that.
 It can be Inferred that separation causes damage by blocking the proximity goal, just as Shirley's flirtations blocked the exclusivity goal.
 Elsewhere he describes her fllrtatlousness as "jeopardizing our relationship" before they were married.
 Another consequence of the proximity goal is that partings are difficult; a nimiber of incidents have to do with sorrowful departures: 6H6: I think the thing that bothers me the most and sometimes It bothers me when I leave in the morning Is if something happens to either one of us and we'll don't see each other again.
 And that makes me—I—every once In a while that thought strikes me—maybe it doesn't other people who are married—and It makes me very sad.
 And I just want to go back and say some more—and sometimes we're—it's very hard for us, you know, we'll be very slow 33 at parting and Shirley will some mornings, you know.
 Just going to work Shirley'11 be at the door waving to me and stuff.
 That'9 Important 1 think to both of us that we do care enough that—and even little departures are Important.
 Talking about his outoftown business trips, which he does not enjoy, Alex dwells on another goal—that of sharing experience.
 This can be seen as a logical consequence of the proximity goal.
 Shared experience both requires proximity, and affirms it.
 6H6: Now I would not choose to take a vacation alone.
 That would be terrible to me.
 I would prefer to have Shirley with me.
 On any sort of vacation or pleasant business at all.
 Any sort of real pleasant time I prefer to have her with me because if—I really would prefer to share those experiences with her.
 In fact, one of the things that I don't like about the trips is—those trips which are clearly just for me.
 When I do go to someplace very good to eat or I get to go to a show, I really feel badly about her not being there because we don't have that as a shared experience anymore.
 And those shows and good meals and things like that that we've done as a shared thing are really important to us and have been—are good moments for us in our marriage.
 So much so that, 6H6: I'd probably feel more guilty about going to a show than almost anything else we'd do because the two of us love to go to a show.
 And I would probably—I'm going to be In New York for about a week—or in Stamford for about a week in January.
 And I'm going to be in— about 8 days I'm going to be away in January including 4 or 5 in Stamford.
 And when we're in Stamford we often get tickets to New York shows—take a train in.
 And I'm sure we'll go see some shows.
 I'm going to try my best to go—to talk people into shows that Shirley would not want to go to, but I would.
 And as the following excerpt shows, this goal of sharing experiences has a not inconsequential influence on the couple's economic decisions: 6H6: But I also think that it's excellent when I—you know, when I can have the chance to have J.
 along.
 Not to show her that I'm working hard because I wouldn't take her on a trip when there's no choice but to work 12 hours a day.
 Like the trip to the Carribean would have been ridiculous for her to go on because it was—there were—days began at 7 in the morning and ending at 7:30 in the evening of work.
 And nothing pleasant at all happening.
 But If it's going to be for a meeting situation where the amount—actual work Is marginal and there are spouse affairs going along with it and there are maybe even some social affairs with It a dance or dinners or things of that sort.
 And it's apparent that a wife would be—or a spouse would be very much welcome and comfortable there then yes, you know, by all means we've gone Into debt over those.
 I mean we really have.
 We've spent more than we should have often on those, without a hesitant mind, and I still don't look back on them and think that that was money wasted.
 By no means was that money wasted.
 They have "made a lot of wonderful trips'' which have "been one of the highlights of our marriage.
" She in turn, jumps at the chance to go on a trip with him, and Insists that they find a recreational activity to do together—the one they have settled on is ice skating 6H2: Because at the time we were sort of looking for something to do together and Shirley—the options she had brought up were unacceptable to me, particularly the one to go square dancing.
 That was one that I had just—we tried some sports, we did volleyball for a while but then I just hurt my shoulder.
 And I couldn't play volleyball anymore.
 But we—Shirley said, I remember her saying, "We don't do anything together," or something, you know, she had one of these—and I was, I said, "That's crazy.
" You know, "We live together we have all sorts of things we do together all the time," but she wanted something specific she could put her finger on that we did together.
 Just as forced separations are met by attempts to remain tied together at a distance, unavoidable occasions when pleasurable experiences cannot be shared are countered with efforts to share these experiences vicariously: 6H6: If I go to a show I—once I've gone, you know, once it's too late, you know, not to go.
 I try to tell her as much as I can to share with her.
 She spends a lot of time looking real sad when I'm telling her about it.
 To make sure that I know that she would prefer to have been there but I do tell her.
 In—and neat restaurants that I've been to or something like that.
 Places that I would like to, in the future—us, you know, have us go to together.
 Just as he filled his overseas letters with details of his life in the Navy, he shares with her all the details of his business trips—"And the trip is something to be discussed with her as far as I'm concerned"—as well as the ins and outs of office politics.
 A media specialist for a large company, he brings all of the films he has a hand in producing home for her to view.
 She always presses him for more details of his solitary trips: 6H6: My memory is not as good as hers for details.
 And she always wants more details and usually what happens to me is I don't remember.
 As soon as I get back I have trouble with some details but over the next week or two weeks or maybe a period—a long period of time as I remember more details I tell her.
 But I tell her about things like the politics and the meeting itself and what happened and she's really my sounding board on a lot of that stuff.
 When they've been difficult meetings she really is a sounding board.
 I've, always shared my work with Shirley.
 A potential of being joined to another person is that that union can become even closer over time, and Alex characterizes his marriage in this way.
 He talks of how they are "much more tied to each other now than we were then.
 We were still two independent people," implying that now they are not.
 He feels "more in love"; romantic love has "deepened and grown stronger.
" They like to be with each other more, and also to do things for each other more than before.
 To separate himself from his wife and children becomes more and more difficult: 34 6H4: I just don't think marriage is about me.
 I think It'c about us and each time you add another person in there that person becomes very deeply involved.
 Adding children.
 It's hard for me to see how you can separate yourself from all of these other individuals that you've become so tied to.
 Other marriages may not be like mine and Shirley'e where 1 feel, you know, that we are this close.
 6H4: 1 certainly believe that Shirley as an individual should have her rights and privileges as 1 think 1 should.
 But I also believe very strongly in Shirley and Alex as the married couple or the D.
 family as it exists here as the family that in itself has rights and privileges thit must be seen to.
 Individual needs may interfere with the needs of the marriage.
 And analysis, Alex believes, will create this interference because it promotes individual needs: At some point, and increasingly as his story moves toward the present, he begins to talk about the marriage itself as no longer "two independent people" coupled together, but as a person In its own right: 6H1: When Shirley came back we shortly after that got an apartment and I think that was the beginning of some good things.
 We were really more upset about the ship's leaving than we had been about anything else and I think that was a sign that we were beginning to really feel for our marriage.
 In a series of similarly striking metaphors, he speaks of the marriage growing and maturing, 6M6: Our marriage and our love has grown a great deal over the years and only in the last maybe eight, nine, ten yenrs do I feel that it's really matured.
 and as something he has a confidence in: 6H2: I think we pass the crisis then and I had a confidence in our marriage then which I think I was lacking right at the point when we were—you know, well like I said we—I don't think we got to know each other in that very intimate way until we got overseas.
 Elsewhere he speaks of some things as being "a breach of the faith of the marriage," more or less "good for a marriage," "helpful to a marriage situation," "hard for the mnrriage," and "challenging to marriages," eHl: There is certain kinds of analysis, encounter groups and all sorts of things are done now that do focus on the individual.
 Yes, and 1 think that is challenging to marriages.
 What it really comes down to, the big question is, should the couples that break up, as a result of having these things, should they have been married at all? Maybe those marriages weren't any good anyway.
 But you then begin to wonder—take this a step furtheryou wonder if any marriage would make it given the—given egotism.
 If you put the self ahead of the marriage, if any marriages would last.
 What I'm saying is that I myself don't know whether analysis destroys that type of relationship, or whether it just points out the problems with that type of relationship.
 Here the goal of marital permanence is recast in terms of human survival—Alex wonders "if any marriage would make it.
" And another goal is introduced, that of unselfishness toward one's spouse.
 This is expressed elsewhere as "the desire to give more to the otfter person than you're giving to yourself, at times" and "the need to give In the marriage.
" Egotism, by contrast, is "putting the self ahead of the marriage.
" The exa<t logic of unselfishness as a goal of marriage as a PERSON is spelled out in the following statement concerning the effects of his wife's analysis; this statement makes use of the PERSON metaphor once again: 6H4: Our marriage is a very good thing for both of us.
 Has been a good thing for both of us.
 And is the—to me is the best thing in the world for both of us.
 And in analysis you have to deal with 100% of yourself, me.
 You know, the "me" generation is often brought up.
 And one of the things that's brought up is the—a lot of analysis.
 A lot of these, "the importance of looking out for Number One" type concepts.
 Well that's what analysis is to a great degree.
 You're really going after yourself and your analyst is always saying, "You have a right to this, you have a right to that, you have a right t o — " You know, "Other people have no right.
" Well that really works very well when you're in analysis.
 It doesn't work very well when you're in the middle of a marriage.
 Because a marriage is not that.
 A marriage is something else.
 It's something where you have to behave to give away part of this right to always react, certainly.
 Therefore Alex is afraid of analysis; for analysis threatens marriage by blocking the marital unselfishness goal in the same way as his wife's flirtatiousness threatened the marriage by blocking the goal of exclusivity, and extended separation threatened the marriage by blocking the proximity goal: 6H4: When Shirley was in analysis for a short period of time.
 When that happened that was very hard on me and, you know, we had a very good marriage.
 And I think analysis—I was afraid analysis was going to ruin it.
 And I suspect that Shirley is too.
 Because she said to me, "I dread the day you ever go into analysis because I don't know if you'll—you know, I don't know what'= going to happen to you.
" You know—and—as if something might happen to our marriage.
 At the same time Alex agrees that individuals have the right to find out who they are and what they want out of life, and he wonders whether there isn't some alternative way "to analyze people in a marriage as opposed to analyzing people who are not in a marriage situation.
" Because, as he says about individual analysis, in one final metaphor, 6H4: If you start to take one part—it's something like trying to analyze only one side of my brain.
 To take one part of the family and deal that way.
 I am arguing that metaphors engender goals.
 MARRIAGE IS BEING A COUPLE engenders the marital goals of permanence, exclusivity, proximity and shared experience, because these are properties of BEING A COUPLE which realize the chosen metaphor.
 This metaphor engenders the further goals of connectedness during separation and vicarious sharing of separate experiences because these are alternative ways of realizing the goals of proximity and shared experience, respectively.
 In the same way, MARRIAGE IS A PERSON entails the goal of marital unselfishness.
 But marital metaphors, themselves, are organized by underlying conceptualizations.
 The logic which links these two metaphors seems to be a processual one—that of two independent people coupled together and merging into a single person.
 35 A further set of metaphors ubiquitous In Alex's thinking, marriage as some kind of MANUFACTURED PRODUCT, Is linked to the metaphor, MARRIAGE IS BEING A COUPLE.
 This is done by equating one particular property of BEING A COUPLE—permanence—with a property taken by MANUFACTURED PRODUCTS—durability.
 The reasoning is revealed In one of the interview segments above: 6H1: That, you know, we were now a family.
 Just the two of us, we were a family, and that—and the commitment was to make that family move.
 You know, that it was going to be a solid thing "just like the parents' had been," with an ensuing discussion of marriage in the '60's contrasted with the mass divorce of today.
 Another passage which makes explicit the rel.
itionship between product manufacture and permanency is 6H1: Wlien we got the apartment in Virginia Beach in Norfolk it was really nice.
 And it was—I have very fond memories of that place and our marriage at that place.
 I think we began to really form a marriage there.
 The fact that Shirley got pregnant also Indicates we were getting into something more permanent.
 Thus strong or solid or good marriages, or what Alex elsewhere calls successful marriages, like his own, are those which are permanent.
 His comparisons with other couples inevitably employ the DURABLE PRODUCT metaphor to distinguish between these marriages and others which are "weak," or "broken'': 6H2: And we were relying on the kind of looking at each other and saying, "Well," you know, "Who are you?" Now people were doing that up there, married couples were doing that quite often and it resulted quite often In broken marriages.
 There was a lot of trouble with that.
 A lot of couples who came up there [TO ICELAND] had problems.
 And some other couples that came up there seemed to be very strong in their marriages, when they left there, as I think we were.
 And we remained good friends, although longdistance friends, with some of these couples.
 That we knew up there who were our age, who had good strong marriages, and whose marriages were obviously strengthened by the stay there.
 Or at least not weakened by it.
 I think our marriage was strengthened there.
 I think we did—we were forced to look at each other very closely.
 While Alex is "not exactly sure why one marriage works and another doesn't," he does have Ideas about what has made his own marriage, and other strong marriages he has known, work: 6H2: Well I'd say there's something about those people that we knew, they had a basic solid foundation in their marriages that could be shaped into something good.
 Here the product is an edifice of some sort, to allow the notion that what is critical Is a solid foundation.
 The foundation, he believes, is ''commitment": 6H2: The couples that we knew that it was working, I don't think there was any question in their minds about getting married.
 All of them were pretty sure that they wanted to get married.
 And they were pretty sure they knew what to do with marriage.
 And this was true about us too, even though, I've said over and over again, you know, how much we've changed and how much our relationship has matured.
 (Here he refers to the MARRIAGE IS A PERSON metaphor, which Is not applicable in this context), I still, at the very beginning, I said, you know, right away we knew there was a commitment.
 And this was the same thing that was basically true about all these couples.
 I think they all got married thinking that this was "the thing.
" The right thing to do and it made sense to them.
 in his own case the commitment to marriage is attributable to background, and it becomes clear that the commitment Itself is about not giving up the marriage; now, perhaps, permanence is equated with the tenacity of the effort rather than the durability of the product: 6H1: I think we're just lucky as hell, that we have a good marriage.
 And I think it's not Just due to luck but also the fact that both of us are—have deep coranltments to the concept of marriage based on our backgrounds and upbringing.
 We couldn't have given this up once we made the commitment to it, without tremendous trauma.
 He attributes this attitude to the common cultural heritage he shares with his wife, because "Jewish families are strong and such" and "the cultural heritage gets carried on.
" Even though his parents' marriage, unlike his own, is far from ideal.
 Strong marriages are less likely to break than weak ones.
 But the introduction of the DURABLE PRODUCT metaphor seems to permit a proliferation of metaphors expanding this notion of marriage as some kind of MANUFACTURED PRODUCT.
 A common one Alex uses is a metaphor of marriage as a production or project, the effort at making the marriage, an effort which in his words either "works" or doesn't work, and which you have to "work at" and "work out.
" In one version, the result is a decidedly homemade product: 6H4: Maybe this is just for us.
 Maybe this has nothing to do with anybody else.
 But it could be that—our situation when we got married was such that we had lots of room to adjust.
 Because we didn't have any idea wh.
it we were getting Into.
 That gave us a lot of room to adjust.
 And by the time we had been through the first year we realized, you know, there would have to be adjustments made.
 And a few years afterwards when things really got serious we were—you know, when the marriage was strong, it was very strong because it was made as we went along—it was sort of a doityourself project.
 6H7: I think they believe in home and family too and perhaps I've gotten this strong feeling about home and family from the fact that they're together despite all this bickering and arguing, you know, they would never think of divorcing, I don't believe.
 X don't think it ever crossed their minds.
 But there are other factors which worked for he and his wife: 6H2: I will only say this, what worked for us is, we have a common cultural background.
 We have the Jewish heritage whicli is very strong— that heritage is very strong and has made a difference for us.
 We are supportive of each other and we are very, ver;/complimentary to each other.
 He elaborates on this latter "asset": 36 6H4: I think that we were so different and we had such complimentary differences that our weaknesses—that both of our weaknesses were such that the other person could fill in.
 And that quickly became apparent to us that if we wanted to not deride the other person for their weaknesses we would instead get their strengths in return.
 And that's what I think has been the asset—these are the assets that have been very good for us.
 And I suppose what that means is that we have both looked into the other person and fou:id their best parts and used those parts to make the relationship gel.
 And make the relationship complete.
 Here he moves to another PRODUCT metaphor which suggests cannibalizing parts from two brokendown automobiles to build a working one.
 Elsewhere, the PRODUCT idea allows still another metaphor: 6H4: I'd certainly hate to see people— everybody in the world jumping into marriage immature.
 But maybe there's really something to the idea that it is not so much how you feel—exactly how you feel before you get into a marriage but what you can make of life, you know, in the marriage that really counts.
 Having thought it out—in other words, having thought it out beforehand and coming to the conclusion that you really are in love.
 Might not be as good for a marriage as having gotten married, looked into what was worthy of being in love about, found it, Identified it after awhile, because it does—it takes a while, and then made that the cornerstone.
 And finally, another element in their situation which, coupled with commitment, made for a permanent marriage was the very lack of any idea, at the outset, what marriage was about; this understanding permits him still another DURABLE PRODUCT metaphor: bHl<: But I think that my commitment to the marriage was just so strong and I—as I said before I think this had a lot to do with heritage and background and what we knew had to be done.
 My commitment to the marriage was so strong that even though, or maybe—I don't know, m.
nybe because I hadn't thought about this, because I had to make it a struggle, or because it was a struggle for us that we forged a lifetime proposition.
 And maybe it was because things were wrong at first, and we were screwed up and we didn't know what we were doing.
 Maybe that had something to do with what was good about It.
 The fact that we really had to work at it.
 So that all these different metaphors—of carrying out a project, shaping a product, putting it together from different parts, building an edifice with a solid foundation and a cornerstone, forging something that will last a lifetime, something strong and unbreakable— are permitted by the underlying, and more general, understanding that MARRIACe' IS A MANUFACTURED PRODUCT.
 And each of these metaphors introduces its own marital goals: you have to start out with the intent not to give up (the foundation); you have to be willing to work and struggle to produce it ((he effort); you have to find something worth being in love about (the cornerstone); you have to identify each others' strengths and overlook each others' weaknesses (the parts), and so on.
 In Schank and Abelson's (ibid.
: 116117) terras, these would seem to be Instrumental Coals—they are all in the service of constructing a durable product.
 In turn, the conceptualization of marriage as a PRODUCT is linked to a prior understanding of marriage as BEING A COUPLE, via the association between product durability and marital permanence.
 Unlike other goals of BEING A COUPLE, such as proximity and shared experience, permanence is an Achievement Goal.
 And it is difficult to achieve, something that roust be worked at, a feature which lends Itself to characterization In terms of production.
 Thus, one model, of what marriage should be like, leads to another model or theory, about how it can be implemented.
 Each suggests apposite metaphors, and each new metaphor is capable of introducing new marital goals.
 This highly individualized and relatively complex model of marriage contrasts with the cultural stereotype with which Alex entered marriage—the goal subsumptlon model which cast marriage as a RESOURCE and asked what he "got out of it.
" In general the preconceived ideas with which husbands and wives enter marriage, by comparison with the understandings which they ultimately construct through the process of encounter and assimilation and realization, are very sketchy, static, culturally standardized and readily dispelled.
 These more complex understandings supply any number of simple stories for a story understanding task, such as Alex decided it was time for Shirley to stop fooling around with any other guys.
 He got married to her.
 or Alex thought that two years apart would do severe damage to his marriage.
 He decided to take the post which provided housing for families.
 Alex feels that analysis focusses on the individual.
 He was afraid that his wife's analysis would ruin his marriage.
 and so on.
 The degree to which marital goals are tied to the metaphors which engender them is more obvious by comparison with a different set of metaphors.
 For this purpose the views of another husband will be somewhat more briefly summarized and interpreted.
 This husband, Bob, began marriage with a version of the LIVE HAPPILY EVER AFTER myth of American marriage, 5H2: I don't think many issues did come up.
 I think that I was a very adept liver in the sense of I did ray thing rather well.
 I was much into being, I think—playing a great deal on the surface of life and living.
 I think that, it seemed to me that people got married and lived together in a certain amount of harmony, ergo, we will marry and live together in a certain amount of harmony.
 We didn't pursue in any depth any issue that I recall.
 That if, I don't know, me walking in with my feet sloppy ticked off Eileen then that was a reason why I didn't walk in with my feet sloppy.
 This model was to be jeopardized, first, by their friendship with another couple who were continually questioning their own relationship: 5H2: I think that we saw at that juncture, probably not even consciously, the potential for a different kind of marriage—a different sort of motif.
 And I think we were both impressed, awed with it and frightened of it.
 Ue didn't want to leap in into an inquiry method of marriage at the point—I don't think either of us felt an impetus to do it, in a sense that it seemed to be the way to a good marriage.
 37 Ultimately, however, a series of extramarital sexual relationships with other people led them to adopt the inquiry method.
 These relationships called into question, for each spouse at different Junctures, the status of their relationship with each other.
 When Bob reacted to his wife's affair by declaring his own intent to figure out "where he is" on his own, 5H4: She then became very concerned about, "My God.
 All this means all this.
 You know what 1 really care about is my relationship with Bob and 1 don't want it to go to hell.
" And I think that was a very important thing to hear for me.
 And I think from then on, we talked a great deal more about our—where are we, and not where are you but—or where am 1 visavis life and love and the pursuit of happiness, but where are you and 1? When he gets involved in an unexpectedly intense love affair, he and Eileen go to the mountains to work through the questions, 5H5: "Where was I? What did it mean?" "What did it mean to the two of us?" fllloen basically supportive and In favor of it but also scared to death and not knowing and I guess in a sense, at least what I—was conveyed to me was, "I kind of—I thought another relationship would be nice and I'm glad that you're having it.
 But my God I didn't think it would be quite this Intense," and all of that sort of thing.
 The—I think she was not overly threatened by my sexual Involvement with Martha but that was a weighty dimension.
 The—I think she was more concerned about the depth of our love and the basicness of my love at that point.
 Which again, excluded Eileen but—certainly had an intensity that was different from my love for Eileen at that time.
 It Is not only Eileen who is scared by the depth of Bob's involvement with Martha: 5H6: I think the risk is basically that the situation of the relationship with Eileen and I would get out of hand, such that I couldn't insure that it would continue no matter what I did.
 And so I would be in a position of losing someone that I thought so much of and I could do little about it.
 And so if 1 played it safe, if 1 played it tentatively, I had a certain control in It, in the sense that Eileen could be running around and making a risk of herself in a sense, but If I didn't I could always hold It together and keep It going and all that.
 Which I might think retrospectively is not probably right either but that was my perception.
 So 1 think really what was at stake was the—was ending—losing the relationship.
 Bob and Eileen meet each one of these marital crises by talking: 5H4: I think it worked out that Eileen and I both perceived that we had little idea of, in fact, what our commitments to one another Involved.
 That we did not In many ways know ourselves particularly well, relative to relationships, relative to life and living and that sort of thing.
 I think it worked out that through miles of talking, with one another, on a lot of thi.
s, that it nt least made sense to us and felt Important to us to coiitlntip our commitment and our living together with one another.
 And on another occasion.
 5H5: So we went back to the mountains and I think It was a time of a lot of walks.
 It was a time of a lot of searching.
 A time when we gave each other some space to kind of work out where each of us were.
.
.
.
 I think at the end of that time together, we both were—it was pretty clear to both of us that our love was a very strong and deep one.
.
.
.
 And in that It was a biggie, that we really had to keep In contact about it, we really had had to talk about it.
 The conclusion which emerges "through miles of talking" Is that the relationship with each other is a basic or PRIMARY RELATIONSHIP, a "biggie," and this understanding makes sense of their relationships with other lovers: 5H5: There was a primary commitment to me and the relationship with Dave was ancillary, may deal on areas that 1 didn't.
 But was largely additive and so that made it good and okay and reasonable and all that.
 That's kind of a rule or an understanding in much of that that made sense.
 5H9: And so there's been a very strong draw.
 I think that as we were slugging through some of the more rational Issues or those that we could get into some sort of rational component, what really prompted us to do that work and what really made it important that we come to some clarity is the strength of the emotional sort of thing.
 Wliic'.
i again I think we both recognized and then Just a—I don't think we glorified it as much as acknowledged that it was there.
 That Is to say my hurt hurt Eileen, her hurt hurt me and I can be hurt by lots of other people's hurt but I think not to a depth that that seemed to consistently have, and then with her as well.
 There—maybe it's the combination that there is a—there's an intellectual stimulation with one another, there's an emotional stimulation with one another, there's a sexual stimulation with one another, there's a childbearlng stimulation with one another, or wrestling with great Issues of the world, and so I think Eileen encapsulates for me an ongoing growth potential for me and all that gambit and vice versa, I believe.
 So—and I think we have found parts of that in many other people many times, but no one who we felt could replace in that sense.
 MARRIAGE IS A PRIMARY RELATIONSHIP, comparable to other relationships, but more basic, Important, emotionally deep, and Irreplaceable.
 Unlike Alex's model of marriage, it does not entail exclusivity.
 Consistent with this view of marriage.
 Bob reports Chat he has trouble with the term 'marriage' itself, and he Is far more Inclined to speak of their 'relationship.
' He comments that 5H8: I think that we looked at our relationship very often in contexts of other relationships.
 We have been as a couple at times very involved with other friends and what they were doing or not doing.
 And they have seemed very comfortable sharing with us where they are and where they aren't and I think we have provided for them sometimes new vocabulary and vice versa.
 I think Eileen has been more open about where she is with her friends than I have.
 Getting out types of new vocabulary or why don't you look at it this way.
 Or getting support for areas that she was in some sense holding out or trying to say Co me, "No, it needs to go anoCher way.
" ThaC sort of thing.
 So I Chink ocher people provided us boch Chrough their direcC requesC for our counsel and help and all and Che times in us utilizing their marriages as kind of case studies for where we are In all this.
 38 This use of other marriages as "case studies" providing nev vocabulary and new perspectives helpful In the t.
isk of understanding their own relationship, contrasts with the way Alex uses other couples' marriages.
 For Alex, other marriages are either like or unlike his own In terms of durability, and their comparison provides him with some understanding of what that dlfferenre is.
 If MARRIAGE IS A PRIMARY RELATIONSHIP, the Preservation Goal Is to keep this relationship together In the course of other, less Important ones.
 But a RELATIONSHIP does not link two people together physically, as does BEING A COUPLE; rather, it positions them visavls one another.
 Thus the problem of Implementing this goal Is not one of constructing a more durable product; It Is one of "keeping in contact," a major Instrumental Goal of this marriage.
 This Involves the "Inquiry method" of marriage.
 Marriage as INQUIRY lends itself to the further metaphor of mutual selfexamination, and hence marriage, as a SPATIAL RELATIONSHIP.
 5H7: I don't know I think that if she were to change dramatically or I were that that may not be so.
 Perhaps part of our commitment to continually evaluate where we nre in some sort of awareness of that phenomenon.
 That the greatest liability to our relationship is to not work on trying to get a good sense of where we are.
 If I let her alone and don't try and she lets me alone wc might satellite far enough away so we're not sure what's in between us.
 This last is a kind of "Lost in Space" metaphor which nicely captures the sense that there are no reference point.
s except each other.
 In this spatial metaphor, "keeping in contact about It" means "talking about It.
" Talk, which Initially served to establish the primacy of their relationship to each other, now serves to keep each spouse apprised of where the other is so that they can, presumably, do whatever necessary to "hold together" their relationship.
 5H5: So I think that the relationship with Martha probably set a lot of ground rules for how we're going to comnunicate through other relationships, at other times.
 I guess it also very deeply confirmed that we can deal with and process in the throes of living relatively effectively, a lot of stuff.
 And that if we don't, if we try to pack it off somewhere, very quickly there's a very petceptiv—perceivable sterility, by each of us, at where our relationship Is.
 Again, the role of communication in this marriage contrasts sharply with the use of talk by Alex and Shirley to convert unshared into vicariously shared experience by telling all the remembered details of their times apart.
 Alex feels his marriage threatened when certain conditions—his wife's flirtations, her analysis, their lengthy separation—arise to block critical marital goals.
 He generally responds to such situations by doing his best to eliminate the threatening condition.
 What threatens Bob's marriage is a much more gradual process of change in one or the other spouse, which can be brouglit about by new relationships or new experiences of any kind, and which Is so nearly Imperceptible that It requires continual monitoring: 5H7: I guess what I'm saying is I don't know how big a change that I thought there might have been but I think that there is always a thought when Eileen goes into a different sort of experience and—or 1 do, of the other partner saying, "How much will this change them?" Indeed, Eileen's going to her Job in Greensboro.
 There was a part of me that monitored very carefully how she was changing In the aspect of, "Is this still the person who I want to Interrelate with? Can I deal with this change? Does it seem reasonable to me? Uhat do I have to gain or lose from It?" That whole bit.
 Such separate experiences cannot be dealt with, simply, by sharing them vicariously, for they alter the Individual in ways that may simply move him or her too far away, so that the relationship can no longer be held together.
 Efforts to keep in contact may not be enough, either.
 Changes in the other person may be so great as to call into question whether this is "still the person who I want to Interrelate with"—whether this should continue to be the PRIMARY RELATIONSHIP.
 For unlike Alex's version of a marriage as some kind of physical coupling, a PRIMARY RELATIONSHIP cannot necessarily be expected to be permanent.
 5H7: I think that what our relationship Is, Is important because we're two other people that do live together, we have lived together, Eileen and—the Information and the knowledge and the respect and love for me that she has Is enormous and vice versa.
 And I think that now It's much more a commitment to making certain that we're pretty clear where each of us are in our growth.
 In our lives.
 In our living.
 Not, I guess—what I don't feel In what you asked Is, not to keep the relationship together but because we have a relationship.
 I truly could conceive of us in our evolution of things feeling that an ongoing relationship, living together, does not make sense.
 When we're at a point in growth and who we are or because of another person or another opportunity that seems to be there that says, "Okay we need not and we probably should not perpetuate this.
" I guess here again I feel very simpleminded about the whole thing In that that we live together we need to clarify these things there's a compelling Interest to do so.
 I feel pretty much the same with most everyone as a matter of fact, but not to the depth of commitment to doing It.
 I mean It's very important to me that Eileen and I are pretty clear where each of us are.
 So that the final Instrumental Goal of marital selfexamination is to assess when it is time to discontinue the relationshipf either because the two spouses have moved too far apart, or alternatively, because another relationship has taken primacy.
 Such assessment, these passages hint, is understood within yet another metaphor, of gain, loss and substltutabllity—A RELATIONSHIP IS AN ECONOMIC EXCHANGE.
 Elsewhere (Quinn n.
d.
) I have described the role of the word 'commitment' in framing marital goals.
 In one of its senses, marital commitment is to those goals which are effortful and ongoing enough to require substantial dedication to them.
 It is not surprising, then, to hear Alex say, ".
.
.
.
the commitment was tomake that family move.
 You know, that it was going to be a solid thing.
" while Bob speaks of "our commitment to continually evaluate where we are," "a commitment to making certain that we're pretty clear where each of us are in our growth, in our lives.
 In our living.
" The word 'commitment' is used to mark those marital goals which are instrumental to the Implementation of a given model of marriage.
 I hope to have hinted that twoliners from storyunderstanding tasks are poor sources of inspiration for a tlieory of goal organization.
 All of us can Interpret any one of the Alex stories I invented above, and probably for the most part Interpret it correctly.
 This is because we have a great deal of knowledge about the possible links between particular goals and 39 particular actions, including both knowledge of human nature and of American culture.
 This knowledge helps us understand what Alex might be up to in the particular instance; It does not tell us much more, because to do such spot Interpretation of someone else's behavior we do not ordinarily need to know his philosophy of marriage.
 We do.
 Indeed, have some folklore about the way in which marriages may organize goals.
 This folklore again.
 Is a misleading source of information about the way goals are actually organized In ongoing marriages.
 It may tell us a lot more about why John decided to get married than about why John decided to get divorced.
 The organization of marital goals and the goals of other interpersonal relationships is better understood in the richer context of extended discourse about the discourser's own relationship—that is, from the Inside.
 While such discourse is not perfectly transparent by any means, it does suggest a view of goals as organized by metaphors which are themselves organized around underlying theories of what a relationship should be and how such a relationship can be implemented.
 REFERENCES CITED: Quinn, Naomi n.
d.
 Analysis of a key word; 'commitment' in American marriage.
 Unpublished ms.
 Schank, Roger and Robert Abelson 1977 Scripts, plans, goals and understanding: an inquiry into human knowledge structures.
 New Jersey: Erlbaum.
 Wilensky, Robert 1978 Understanding goalbased stories.
 Doctoral dissertation.
 Department of Computer Science, Yale University.
 40 S Y M P O S I U M C O G N I T I O N A N D P E R C E P T I O N TRANSFCRMATICNAI STRUCTURE ANL PSHCEPTUAL OHCAMZATION Stephen E, Palmer nnlverslty of Callfprnia.
 Berkeley The problens of structure arid crganlzation ij, perception are arrong the rost cer.
tral ir the history " " • — field.
 In this paper I sugj^est ar.
swers to toth questions.
 To provide An Initial ilea cf the direction I will take, here is a liief preview.
 The organizational phenomena I take to le rrost critical for understandin^; the stn)ctur'=' cf perception are: (a) object constancy dtsplte changes in ir.
age size, shape, rcbiticn, and orientation, (b) motion perception of structured objects, ;c) fifcural (?ccdress or "good f^estelt", (('' perceptual grorplrg of the visual field, ard (e) reference frame effects.
 First, I will argue that these phenomena are related by tYe fact that underlylr.
g then all is a cormon transformatioral structure.
 Second, I will describe a general design for a comnutational systetn within which trarsf orma ticnal structure car.
 be analyzed easily.
 The proposal is to couple a tra.
isforiraticnelly based system of analyzers with an attenticral rrechanism that establishes a variable frar.
? of reference within it.
 Tne job of the dttentional frsre is to move around within the space rf analyzers so as to naximize the Invarlance and stability of the attended output.
 It dees so by ccrrpensa ti r<? fcr the changes brcutiht about by the t ransf orr,at ions .
 Finally, I will maKe a few reparks about why I think tne kiid of computational structure I !3m proprsing is an interestir.
g onp from a pvrely theoretical starjdpoint.
 Transformational Structure The basis of transformational structure Is the concept of transf cnr;d tional invariance.
 Transformational invariance refers to the fact that when an object undergoes a spatial transformation, such as a rotation, a great many changes occur in the pattern of stiiulation on the retina, but at the same time there is a great d° al of higher order structure that does not change at all.
 All sorts of relationships ("r relationships among relationships; do not charg'=, even though each first order property ioes , and these unchanging aspects ar^ the transformational invariants.
 In many cases they correspond mere directly to the intrinsic properties of tne r>=r.
l world object r.
ndergoing the transf crma ticn — its size, shape, color, and so fortn — tnan to the prcpprli=s of its projected image.
 Tne image, after all, changes in ways that the object clearly does not.
 £ecause transformational invariants reflect object properties rather than lm,a^e properties, computing them probably plays an important role in getting from an image based representation to an object or world based one.
 Hew can the transformational structure of an event be computed frcm the spatiotemporal Images that arise from it.
 The problem, of course, is that while it is trivial to compute the image over time from knowledge of the real world object and its real world transformation, the reverse is not at all trivial.
 In fact, there isn't even a unique solution, but only an infinite set of object/transformation pairs.
 In other words, there are nany different world events objects rndergoing transformations — that could give rise to the same specific event images and no logical basis on which to decide the correct one from purely optical information.
 It is clear that some additional assumptions are needed about either the nature of the object, the nature of the transformation, or both to reach a determinate solution.
 To reach the correct solution as well, the additional assrmptions will have to be chosen in a principled way.
 •*'hat assumptions might help here? Clearly a good bet would be any assumption that is generally true cf events in the world.
 Then, arriving at solutions that are consistent with these assumptions will almost always result in veridical perception.
 Perhaps the most striking fact about the transformations that characterize events in the world is that both objects and transformations tend to be fairly stable over time and space.
 This is certainly trie ever short intervals cf time and small regions of space and is usually true over long intervals of time (on the order of at least whole seccri's) and larger regions of space as well.
 To the ettent that this is so, objects can be well approximated as rigid and the transformations they undergo as uniform mctions in three dimensional space.
 Naturally, there are many cases cf nonrigid objects undergoing various complex motions.
 But even these are probably best understood in terms of how they can be analyzed into a structure of roughly ri^id components undergoing roughly uniforn^ motions.
 The motion o*' a person walking is a case cf nonrigid motion that has yielded to such an analysis (Jrhansson, 1973; Cutting, 1981).
 The rigidity and uniformity assumptions suggest that the perceptual system operates in such a way as to maximize invariance in both objects and motions.
 ̂̂  In anthropcmcrphic terms, t)e system "wants" to analyze both objects dnd mctions as "changing as little as possible".
 "Vanting to change as little as 41 possll)le'" refers simultaneously to the facts that that the perceived object/motion pair irust, Ir some sense, account for the sensed variations in the Image and that this can be done In more than one way.
 To pick a well kinetic depth effect, If simultaneously in its orientation, it might be that gets shorter and it rotates in (b) a line of studied exairple, the a line changes projected length and either (a) a line longer by certain amounts as varous possible ways or constant length that is rotating In depth (Vallach S, P'Connell, 1953).
 The latter Is almost invariably perceived, although it sometimes takes an observer several seconds to achieve it.
 Cnce it is perceived, however, it is stable and dees rot spontaneously change to something else.
 According to the present line of thought, the preferred interpretation arises because it is "simpler" than the alternatives given the heuristic assumption that objects in the world tend to be rigid and undergo uniform irotions in three dimensional space.
 Thus, the perceptual system seems to prefer Interpretations of greatest possible invariance.
 Notion and Constancy The perceptual phenomena most directly and obviously related to transformational invariance are those of motion perception and object constancy.
 ^̂ otion occurs when the positlor.
 of some object or part of an object chanfces over time.
 It is the paradigmatic case of 6 iransformatior.
, of course, but it is perhaps not so obvious what it has to do with invariance.
 In fact, the whole concept of a distinct object undergoing motion presupposes invariance in that the object is taken to be unchanging (except for its pcsition, of course) as it moves.
 Logically, one could just as well say that the world had changed its Irtrinsic nature over time.
 This wculd be a mere reasorable notion if one perceived the visible surfaces of the world like a rubber sheet that simply changed its shape plastically during events.
 The fact is that people to rot perceive the world in this way, but as consisting of articulated, unchanging objects that undergo various sorts of notions.
 This highlights the fact that perceiving motions of objects acti:ally presupposes invariant aspects as well as varying ones, ard that an event in the world always has both components.
 tancy from ei ved the etely 0 be too.
 , for the depth the their icnal rmlne of a It a is just ppears, then the other motion perception.
 '' transforration; obj perceived coupled different In the example.
 motion rotation) motion is combined image ( colored r .
 invariance.
 in that :, the object case of a , that object cons side of the coin ction is the perc ect constancy is They are compl for the motior t must be different rotation in depth either the object is rigid and is uniform las in actual 1 or the object is plastic and 1 nonuniform changes prô  as in the •egions ir.
 a depth rotation,.
 in such a way that uce the two dimens plastically "efo motion picture Given that real world events tend to consist of rigid objects in uniform motions, a perceptual system would be biased toward veridlcallty if it somehow embodied preferences toward perceiving rigid objects and uniform motions.
 Indeed, there is good evidence that this is true.
 When presented with ambiguous information, people tend to perceive rigid objects rotating or translating in threedimensional space as long as the cptical structure is consistent with such an interpretation and the system is given sufficient time.
 For example, Johansson (1950) showed that people have a strong tendency to see two moving points as fixed at the ends of a rigid rod moving in three dimensions rather than as moving nonrigidly in two dimensions.
 Thus, an ambiguous object in unambiguous motion tends to be perceived as rigid rather than plastically deforming.
 The other side of this story is that an unambiguously specified object in ambiguous stroboscopic motion tends to be seen in uniform motion (Shepard & Judd, 1976; Farrell & Shepard, 1931).
 Clearly, there is something special about rigid objects and motions for the human visual system.
 Figural Goodness Anothe theory th transformat psychologis goodness.
" to subject and slmplic to others.
 feeling to intuitively simple to g r important problem 1 at is intimately ional structure ts have come to c Figural goodness refe ive feelings of order ity in certain figure The relation of th transformational stru obvious, but it is rasp.
 n perceptual related to is _ what all "figural rs primarily , regularity, s as opposed is subjective cture is not nevertheless Figures are good to the extent that they are themselves invariant over certain types of transformations.
 The most obvious case is that of standard bilateral or reflectional ̂ symmetry.
 _̂ To illustrate, the letters "a" and "r.
" are ref lectlonelly symmetric about their vertical axes because each letter is the same as itself after being reflected about a vertical line through its center.
 The other widely known tyge of symmetry is rotational.
 The letters "N and "Z" are rotationally symmetric through an angle of ie0degrees because each letter is the same as Itself after being rotated by ie0degrees.
 Still other letters have transformational invariance over a number of different transformations: "x", "C", "H", and "l" all have two reflectional symmetries (about vertical and horizontal lines through their centers) as well as lEBdegree rotational symmetry.
 A perfect circle has still greater transformational invariance because it is unchanged by all central rotations and reflections.
 There are two other, less well known types of symmetry: translational and dilational (*eyl.
 1952).
 They are defined by the same abstract scheme as for reflectlcr.
al and rotational symmetries.
 3oth of these latter sorts of symmetries technically apply only to idealized, infinite patterns, but one can define "local" versions that apply to 42 finite patterns by only requiring invarlance for part of the pattern over the trarsformation.
 (See Palmer, in press, fcr a rore complete discussion of symtnetry, local synmetry, and their relation to transforrratlonal structure.
) It turns out that the goodness of figures can he well predicted from its symmetries In this extended sense: the set of transfornat ions over which the figure is Irvarlant.
 Garner (1974) showed that ratings of perceived goodness increased rronotonlcally with the number of transfornatio'^s over which the figure is invariant.
 Garner actually talks about "rotation ar,i reflection (or ? & P) snlsets" of a figure, tut this concept turrs out to be Isomorphic to the number cf rotational and rtf 1 ect ior.
al invariants (Palmer, in press).
 F\jrther, the amount of transforrraiional invarlance a figure has also strongly affects how ^luickly people can natcn two figures for physical identity, how well they remenber a figure, and how easily they can describe it.
 Such results demonstrate the reality of figural goodness in perceptual processing.
 fSee Garner, 1974, for a review).
 There is additional evidence that flgvral goc'ness depends on trarslational and dilatioral invarlances as well (leeuwenberg, 1971).
 In summary, figural goodness seems tc be characterl2ed quite nicely by the concept of transf ormatlcr.
al invarlance.
 The relevant transformations in this case are reflections, rotations, translations, and illations.
 Except for the addition of reflections, these ere the sane set that charactFrized motion and cbjert constancy phenomena.
 It seers unlikely that this is merely a coincidence.
 jrorplnfi The next phenomenon I wart to relate to transformational structure is grouping (Werthelmer, 1922;.
 Figure 1 shows some standard exarples of grouping phenomena In which mcst people report perceiving either a vertical or horizontal oigarizatlor.
 Figure lA demonstrates the infli.
erce of proximity en grouping.
 The dots are orj^anized into vertical cclumr.
s (rather than hcrizctal or diagonal rows) because their vertical proximity is greater than their horliortal Froxlmily.
 Figure 13 eemcnstrates the Influence of sirilarity of orientation.
 All else being equal, similar elements tend to be grouped together and dissimilar elements grouped apart.
 '̂ary different klnes cf similarity have teen shown to affect grouping, but color, size, and orientation are particularly striking.
 Continuity, symmetry, and closure are thre" other well documented factors.
 Lvt perhaps the rost ptent of all is what gestaltists called common fate.
" Elements common fate whPr they direction at the same completely homogeneous group together by rnrve ir, the same rate.
 ;ven a field cf random dct texture spontaneously organizes Into figure and ground ^hen a spatial subset of the dots begins to move together or when the rest of the dots begin to move around them.
 O O o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o D D D n o o o o D D D D o o o o B Fig.
 1: Grouping by proximity and similarity.
 The point I want to phenomena is Just this: together when transformational than they are Transformat ioral make about grouping Elements are grouped they are in closer relationships to each other to other elements.
  "closeness" refers to the magnitude of the transformation required to achieve transformational Invarlance.
 For exarrple, the dots in Figure lA must undergo a larger translation to bring them into congruence with their vertical neighbors than with their horizontal neighbors.
 In Fipure IE, the figures must undergo e rotation as well as a translation to coincide with tr.
eir vertical neighbors, whereas just a translation will suffice for the horozcrtal neighbors.
 Now consider some of the most potent factors in grouping phenomena.
 Similarity of two elements in position, orientation, and size can be defined by the magnitudes of the transforrations — translations, rotations, and dilations, respectively — that are required to make them equivalent.
 Continuity is similarity over local translations, and bilateral symmetry is similarity over reflections.
 And so, once again, we find the same types of transformations lurking behird grouping phenomena as we found behind motion, object constancy, and figural gcodness.
 Grouping seems to be determined by maximizing transformational relatedness within a perceptual group.
 Frames of Reference The final category cf perceptual jjhenomena I went to discusss I will call reference frame effects.
" It Includes a number cf different results in many different domains.
 Whet they all have in common is to suggest that perception at any moment occurs within e single, unitary frame of reference that captures common properties of the whole display.
 Cther properties are relative to this frame, very lik'=l; of deviations from it.
 perceived • in terms example.
 consider now the As an orientation cf a global referer'ce frame can affect shape perception.
 Fi^^ures 2A and 23 show the same form in two orientations that differ by a 4.
5degree rotation.
 Figure 2A is perceived as a square because its sides are hori7ontal and vertical, and Figure 21 is perceived as a diamond because its sides are diagonal.
 Powever, an interesting thing happens when a number of such forms are aligned diagonally.
 The perceived shapes 43 reverse: horizontal and vertical sides produce the appearance of diamonds while diagonal sides produce the appearance of squares (Attneave, 1966; Palmer, in preparation).
 It seems that the tilt of the whole configuration is somehow "factored cut" of the display, and the orientation of the sides is then perceived relative to the whole configuration.
__ The conjecture is that this factoring out" is done by establishing; a tilted frame for the figure within which 45 degrees is the referent orientation.
 This would explain why the shapes are perceived as they are, and it fits well with many other orientsticral phenomena in shape perception.
 (See Hock, 1073, for a review).
 D O A B D D D O < > O consists of translations, rotations, dilations, and reflections.
 Thus, the structure underlying all possible Euclidean frames of reference is based on transformational invariance: the set of transformations that make one reference frame equivalent to all others.
 D Ret the per perceive posltlon their va within geometri Include (origin) (unit s this fra next, transfer frame t exactly repeated rotation unit siz urning to perc ceptual orien d direction of of a point lues depend on which they a cal ccunterpar soniething , orientation ize), and refl me is variable then an un matlons is imp 0 another.
 Th the same as ly: translat s ffor orienta e', and reflec eption, it seems tation of a line motion is like that or the in analytic geometry: the reference fr re perceived.
 like t, this frame seems ames its to akin to a position (axis), resolu tion ectlon (sense).
 And if from one moment to derlying structure lied that relate ese transformations the of one are we have encountered ions (for positi tlon), dlldtions tions (for sense).
 rr,), ffor Fig.
 2: Reference frames in shape perception.
 in IT poin vert show perc ccnf Lnit and Tigu seer ^ f one effe r t i p prom f r^m that i i"<iV ' S i m i o t i o n ts a icall n in ei ve igura , vi away re s the cts ct is inent e of 1 ts lar 9 perc re y ay, rirur them tlon thin from P (Jc t thfof tors are see'i opt refer not 'feet eptio iP d th e 3A, as that wbic eac hanss Perc refer it simil to ri ical icn s are n.
 F sinus e ot ^eo such mov h the h ot on, 1 eptua ence_, out.
" ar i eve b stru but is n well known tc occur or instance, when two oidal n.
otion, one her horizor tally as pie do not usually Rather, the see a es diagonally as a twc dots move toward her as depicted in 95? ;.
 Here agair, it 1 system establishes for_ the common irction "irduced" motion !.
 that an unnovine ecause a larger, more cture serves as the is mcivin,? so slowly ot detected (Eunker, •ig.
 3: Refererce frames in motion peception Tr.
 transfo explain aralyt i is esta numeric assumpt maps i referer differe t y er.
a relate standar e re rreti er ^ c ge blish ally.
 icrs r tc ce 'r nt c ctly the d F latio or.
 el y d' o^et^ ed to wi thi n u r p j> ames ocd ĵ  the ir ucli;< f, of reference frares to structure cen best be alogy to their role in •/.
 There, a reference frame 'describe a point's location It provides a set of P which spatial positions ical coordiretes.
 Tlfferent map the sar.
e point into rates, tî t the;.
' are related same transfernetiors that pcrrespor.
ding frames.
 In pan geometry.
 this set Transformational Theory of ?ercept\;al f̂ tructure All of the perceptual phenomena just discussed suggest that the perceptual system has a definite preference for processing optical structure involving certain kirds of transformational invariances.
 The questions I now want to address are (a) what this mi,;ht tell us about perceptual orgarization ard (b) how sucl.
 a system r;ight be constructed computationally.
 I think the examoles considered above are telling us that" the visual system is b)iilt on a transformational lase that can be used to extract trarsforrations as a heuristic for solving perceptual protlfrs.
 In other words, the system is desif̂ ned to be transparent to transformations of the sort nost often encountered so that it "prefers interpretations involving them.
 iy "trensparent" I mean that (a) these transformations can be computed rapidly and easily in surh a way that (b) the system can compensate for them simply and efficiently.
 This stongly suggests that the system rust be designed to solve the problems of transformational invariance right from the start, and that these design features form the heart of the system.
 s c 1 u r analy to 0 t^at a r a 1 V rela't that withi inva r fixei rPPre will but inter withi There ion I zers t ne an comput zers ions, establ n the •iances ions sen ta t discus the re relate n the are three wll1 cons hat are t other, ( e output over and (c) a ishes a p analyze The is stor ior of s each pa eder shov: d propose complete basic CO ider here ransforma t) higher similarit local n dttent erceptual r space output ed in the perc rt in tu Id rememb Is that 0 systemic mporents i : (a) a sp tiorally r order ana y of lower transforma lonal mec reference that mar of atten memory eived obje rn more er that th nly make structure .
 the ace of elated lyzers crder tlonal hanism frame imizes tiocal as a ct.
 I fully, ey are sense 44 firstorcPf A".
aly7er Space The first conpone for sets' cf analyz propertips c' the visu ^vrprisirgly, alrosl «ill ("o, es Irng as structural relatior.
sh structural cc"Strair.
t transfornatlorally re Precisely what this me fully and fornally press), tut the basic Tvo analyzer? are tra if their_ "receptive furctlcns' are ide transformeticr.
 frcm a present case, the surprisingly, of discussed earlier: t reflections, and dil "sinilarity' transfo geornetry).
 I cal transforTationally functional systerrs bee this transforTdtional function 'Palpier, in p r.
t CO ers al fi any t h ey ips t is Idted ans i el sew nctio nsfor fiel ntico speci set the ransl a t i 0 n rrnati 1 rel ause sense ress) nsists cf a set corputlr*^ spatial eld ir parallel.
 sort of analyzers hive particular 0 each other.
 The that they be to each other.
 s developed rore nere (Palr.
er, in n is Just this: r^aticnally_ related ds" or "spatial 1 exceot for a fir set.
 I'' the corsists, not transformations ations, rotations, s (the sccalled ons of Fuclldean such sets cf ated analyzers they compute, in the same spatial relations bet.
een pairs of analyzers in the space reflect the transformational relations between them as discussed above.
 Ihis transforralicnal structure defines the system.
 An "bar d (ala Fu differ size of detecto transla composi transfo of edg functio because specifi field vice ve exampl elector bel S, only in their r is tion, te of rmation e dete nal sys there ed set into a rsa.
 e wou s w «(iese the rece relat rotat tw s.
 A ctors tem, is that n edg Id be ith 1.
 1 posit ptive ed t ion, 0 0 simi wou disti no tr nakes elik a se inhib 9e2) ion, fie 0 eac dila r m larly Id CO net ansfo a ba e rec t of itory whose orient Ids.
 h othe tion, ore const nstitu from rmatio rlike eptive excitatory surrounds elements ation, and Each bar r one by a or some of these ructed set te another the first n from the receptive field and The ov system can space in wh dimensions transformat i.
e.
, the (or size), analyzers number of a space is analyzer p appropriate a discrete in Figure orientation of rotatio reflection reflection) resolutlona The diagra the actual structure real space.
 in concret vertical di Figure 4 whole two represent t a case full erall te c ich ea of t icnal posit and re relati nalyze only oints.
 to t lattic 4.
 (whic r) an (whi , wh 1 dime m is n space, of mo To t e ter mensio as re diren he two of be structure o onceptualize ch analyzer he space c relations ion, orienta flection (or ve to each o rs is certai sparsely Therefore hink of it a e structure The cycli h repeats af d the bina ch repeats ile both nsions are s aturally a s since one c re than thr hink of the ms , one car n cf the str solution an sional arra positional er cans.
 N f a d as a is a p orresp among tion, sense ther.
 nly fi popul , it s some such a c dim ter 1 ry di aft posit imple implif annot ee dim whole conce uclure d then y of dimens otice functional n analyzer olnt.
 The ond to the then resolution ) of the Since the nite, the ated with is more thing like s depicted ension is 60degrees mension is er each ioral and orderirgs.
 icatior of depict a ensiots in structure ive of the shown in imagine a ther (to ions) like that the Orientation Sense H \ o — Fig.
 4: The space of analyzers.
 aigherorder Analyzers The importan relatedress among output is guarantee two patterns (or are identical over relates them.
 F pattern with reflec vertical axis sue discussed before, invariant over vertical line.
 No that covers any por output, whatever Identical to that related to it by vertical line.
 M true for all pairs each other ty this given any pattern sym.
metry.
 Thus, transformational r order analyzers regularities in the reflected in easi in their outputs.
 ce of transformational analyzers is that their d to be the same given any portions of patterns) that the transformation that or instance, consider a tional symmetry about a h as the letter "a".
 As this means that it is a reflection about this w consider any analyzer tion of this pattern.
 Its that might be, must be of the other analyzer reflection in the same oreover, this is generally of analyzers related to particular transfornatlon having that type of the interesting fact about elatedness among first is that transformational stimulus event will be ly computable regularities In general, higher order analyzers are elements that compute such relationships among the outputs of lower order analyzers.
 They respond to symmetries or motions, depending on whether they compare outputs simultaneously or over a time lag.
 We have just discussed a case Involving symmetry, but it turns out that motion analysis has exactly the same logical structure except for the intrc'uction cf a temporal difference.
 For example, suppose that a pattern at some time produces outputs in the first order aralyzers and that the pattern then moves, say, by a translation.
 The output this produces after a shcrt duration will be exactly the same as 45 the output It produced pair of analyzers related over that time lag.
 Initially for each by that translation These conceptual! structure there proh They repr relations compute reg spacetine trarsformat think of space as th they have structure.
 of course, cf rate of second zed as depicted ahly wo esent among fi ularltie (not ional in ther as e first the sam In the there rr.
 0110 n .
 orde the in uld loca rst 0 s in ion) varia heing orde e sor case is th r ana links Figur be fa 1 t rder a space ty ncps.
 eirhed r ana t of t of mot e addi lyzers in th e 4.
 r more ransfo nalyze (symm de One ded in lyzers ransfo ion a tonal can le e lattice although of them.
 rmational rs.
 They etry) or termining can even the sane because rmational nalyzers, dimension seccn of pi on to araly Just outpu rrcst analy would and corpa i .
1 f 0 r •iecel This t orde ggyta p.
 Th zers c the ts of sens zers t prov regvla re ove m a t i c r.
 e r a i i o ransfo r anal cklng at is, ould b same first e for hat CO ide i rities r a fu ab ns .
 rtnati yzers still the e com way order mot mpare nf orm of rther out onal str allows higher outputs pared fo that th a nalyze ion ana outputs aticn a notion.
 time Ic accele uctur th<= p order of se r Sim ey c rs .
 lyzer simu bout Th d wtu ratio e of the ossibility analyzers cord order ilarity in ompare the This makes s.
 Those Itaneously symmetries ose that Id provide ns ar.
d Visual Attention and the ^ind^s Fye it tren here that tran "com secc tran char.
 nl^e C ̂'er unlf obs'' the otse ejac vill Iran copp Given be use sforpot i s to will sformct pensate rd dft sformat ge at ct is c tie, ormly rver we sere ra rver, *ly Car net ch sforrei e n s a t e s such a d, as ional fir.
c compe icn .
 s" for er th ion all.
 the ir.
 th re to te as then eel, a a r e e.
 î r b for t space irten structu some in nsote Or anoth e firs  i.
e.
 ?cr directl image c e visu move aw the obj the two nd the Thus, :• the he obje cf ana ded , re7 Th ternal for p er if t yiel , inv exampl y towa f this al f i ay fro ect no trans irra^e the " m obs ct mot lyzer to "f e rea tran the tran arip ds th a I i a n 6, s rd an obje eld.
 m the ved t forma of t ovirg erver ion.
 s, how can actor cut" 1 problem sfcrmaticn external sfcrmaticn lylnt' the e identity ce or no uppose an observer.
 ct expands If the object at oward the ticns will he object bacKvard" exactly I w happens corpensa about i visual ant tc inside tinf̂  f n the at tent analyzer mind's e world , posi tion analyzer accorpli simple That is correspc cttentio of the a scale <" accompli r e s 01 u 11 46 spao ye.
 I visua ani 0 Sî a she 5 I rev erne , rot nd n a 10 n nelyze zcomin shed on dim sugg the cr t worl ion P t ike 1 a rient ce.
 olh 0 n s ation tc y the r spa g" al by ensic est t head.
 ransf d, ho moves 1 a y i n he ey ttent a t i o n Unl f th^ withi s of trans ori ce.
 e .
<os tran r .
 hat s Rat ormat wever etc s th e wit icn with ike se tr n the th latio entat Simil s 1 y n , slatl o m e t h i n g her than ions by I sugg ut with e role h respec can cha re5j)ect the e ansforma analyze e rind ns of ional d crly, ch 1961) ons al similar the eye moving est that in the of the I to the nge to ye, ticns i ts the it ty r spdce.
 's eye visual imensicn an^es of can be ong the Perceptual Reference Frames At the heart of this proposal is the hypothesis that visual attention is localized within the analyzer space and is centered at a particular position.
 This establishes a perceptual reference frame for further perceptual analysis.
 Fixing visual attention on one position of the analyzer space induces a reference frame because it determines a position {or origin), orientation (or axis), direction along that orientation (or sense), and resolution (or unit of distance) relative to which the contents of visual attention are coded.
 Thus, positioning visual attention determines the description given to objects under analysis.
 This is entirely analogous to the role of reference frames in analytic geometry.
 A circle has a different equation when the origin cf its reference frame is at its center than when the origin is offcenter.
 The corresponding phenomenon in perception occurs when the same figure looks like a square or a diamond, depending on the orientation of the reference frame within which it is perceived (see Figure 2 ) .
 If vis reference of shapes, rigid tra compensated changes w result is reference or changing larger so despite the It is eas reference displacemen nechanism w rigid trans contents of they migh transformat imagine th register u objects r deforming o of rigid by an atten not requir the object.
 requires c as well .
 I manages t analyzers constancy opeiation w ual atte frare fo then it nsformat for by ithin t analog frare di its sea that i changes y to s f rarie ts of oul'"" be forratio the att t be ion.
 I at such niform ather bjeets .
 objects tional t e any ch Any ct hanges i f the a 0 foil space an(̂  met ill embo ntion acts as a r constructing d is clear tha ions can be corresponding a he analyzer sp ous to a g splacing as the le size as the c ts equation did in the geometri ee that the c that would such an a able to compe ns of objects, k entional frarie — constant de I is not diff a system wculd transformations than complex m Compensating fo can be accomplis ransfornation an ange in the desc her sort of tran n the object's d ttenticnal fram ow the path w that maximize ional uniformity dy such "prefere perceptual esriptions t certain completely ttenticnal ace.
 The eometrical circle did ircle grew not chenfTP c figure.
 hanges in accompany ttenticnal nsate for eeping the  whatever spite the icult ^ to prefer" to of rigid otions of r motions hed sinply r it dees ription of sfcrmaticn esciiption e somehow ithin the s object , then its nces .
" Attentiopal Control This lead how this at contrclled.
 I outset that conscious con reference fra pressed, atte sizes, and or ecnsclo\:s cent level cognit usually extend are currently d «reat deal o s dire tentio t shcu there trol re.
 nd to ientat rol n Ive (̂  own dealin f the ctly to the ne nal reference Id be mention is a eertai over the People usuall specified ions.
 Eut I s f attention activity that to the level a g.
 Rather, it ni ttygritty Tt problem: frame is ed at the n amount of attentional y can, if positions, uspect that is a high does not t which we seems that details of dtteritional deternlned ty control (Tust be strongly stitrulxis structure.
 Hov right this be dcre? Ihe arswer I want to explore Is that the structure of stirvli deterr'ines how visual dttentior is pcsilicned — their symrretries and regularities.
 The tes,ic idea is that attTtior is positior;ed tc maxinize transforpational irvarlance.
 Tnis can be done by *'ir.
eir.
g the naxir.
al output frcrr the hifcher order ara^yzers for a ci'̂ f̂i ref;ion of the analyzer space, since these analyzers are the rnes sensitive to trarsforpatirral invariance.
 It is different syirnetrles "econoiry cf (e.
g.
, Att reference synnetries.
 consider a the origin center, t reflectiona centered a is offcent point is joining it facts will the second offcenter space.
 The the positi corresponds will be a attentional the circle.
 important reference anj regul coding" reave, 1 frare be To gain the of the re he c i r c 1 and tout tha er, its 0 a single tc the be repr order ana positio output w on withi to the c strong referenc tc r frame arities scherr.
e r54) r chcse illustr case ference le ha rotati t point nly sytr reflect circle esented lyzers ns wit ill be n the a entertendenc e frane ealize s imply There for repr eqi:ics n to max ate t n of a cir frame i all cnal *hen iretry a ion abou s c'nt in the at the c hir the much g nalyzer Theref0 y to est at the here dif f fore , psent that imize is cle.
 s at pes symme the 0 bout t the ^r • ou tpu pnter ana reate space re, abiis cente that e r e r.
 t any ation the such fact.
 *hen its sitle tries riftin that line Fuch ts of &T.
d lyzer r at that there h the r of For a circle, there will be no particular orientation preference, precisely because it has complete central symmetry.
 For a square, however, or for any other figure that has significant asymmetries, there will be decided preferences in orientation.
 A square is symmetric about only the lines Joining opposite midpoints of its sides or opposite vertices of its angles.
 Therefore, only these four orientations are serious candidates.
 If the midpoint line is used, the figure would have a different perceived shape than if the vertex lire were used.
 In fact, these two_frame orientations result in the "square"" and "diamond" interpretations, respectively Gbviously, not all figures have exact symmetries like circles and squares do.
 lut the same principles would apply to approxiirate symmetries.
 Th placeme process transf0 informa highest least several dlffere maximal percept square/ two we Palmer, e nt no 0 rma tl tion out local pax nt pe po ual d iamo 11 k 1960 tion f at Its onal by put ly.
 ima, rcept sitio re nd a nown Fal I have tention i goal i invarlan seeking in the Sometime and in s will ar ns are ference nd ambig examples men ^ luc in s a 5 ce the mind "hill to in th pos analyzer s there these c ise when chosen frane.
 uous tri ^ttnea her, 19fl for the climbing" maxinize e stimvlus ition of space, at will be eses quite different for the The angles are ve.
 1968; seldom 1 ccmploT le acco fixation analyzer is evid«= most g r^asonab two glo resoluti local f rescluti that t fixation form a result descript previous single a e sufflci object.
 mplished s at ot space t nee c f a ilcbal 1 le guess bal fira 0" level ixations on to cod he cent s are som represen will be ion, much ly (Palme ttentional fixation will ent to code a whole scene or '̂ô e complete ceding wculd by making many attentional her positions within the hat have high ouputs.
 There bias toward beginning at the evei (Vavon, 1977/, A would be that after one or tions of an olject at a low of the analyzer space, nany world be rade at hie;her e details.
 I am assuming ents of these ehow stored in tat ion of the a hierarchical attentional memory tc world.
 The structural like those I have discussed r, 197?, 1977;.
 Given th to maximize is not diffic if the ocject a matter of t the analyzer motion analyz that these transformatio therefore, transformatio following t analyzers.
 raintainlng transformatio begins to r not as a squa shape until changes back is whet wou were not fol initially us fixed in the suspect that people are rotating, ye into the cent at attention can transformationa ult for it to CO begins tc move.
 racking the same space with t ers discussed e analyzers ar nal invariance o that mainta nal invariance he maximum o Icing so has object consta n.
 For example, otete, it is pe re that change it becomes a into a square ag Id be expected lowed by the ed to code its same unchanging the latter is w shown a tight t see it as cir er.
 be pos 1 invaric ntinue to That is maximum he help arlier.
 e sensit ver time ini ng will utput of the effe ncy ove when a rceived a s in pe dianoni a ain.
 The if the r reference shape, b orientati hat happe spiral cles cont i tiered nee, it do so r.
erely through of the Recall ive to , and, maximum entail these ct of r the square s such, rceived nd then latter ctation frame ut were on.
 I ns when pattern ractlng Crganizational Phenomena Revisited We now begin to see how motion can be analyzed and constancy can be maintained within such a transformationally based system.
 The transformations are initially oded by the higher order analyzers and then \;sed to achieve and maintain maximal constancy.
 The motion finally perceived is not a simple function of the motion analyzers, since it too depends on a reference frame that maximizes invariance.
 This is accomplished by an attentional mechanism that finds and follows maximal output levels within the analyzers sensitive to motion and their higherorder analyzers.
 Transformations of this reference frame can compensate for stimulus transformations, thereby maintaining constancy.
 It seems necessary that much of this must be done outside conscious attention, however, because there hardly would be enough of it to go around.
 ^ove likely, once an object's representation has been established in memory, its representational schema can follow the approriate reference frame without conscious attention.
 This monitoring process 47 vould only require conscious attention if something unexpected were to occur, such as the olject disappearing or changing its intrinsic properties.
 *^any perceptual grouping phenomena are a natural result of this attentional process working within a transformationally structured space.
 It seeks the maxiinal amount of transformational invariance at different levels of resolution and cedes elements together that are closely related within the analyzer space.
 Given that attention can only cover a portion of the analyzer space and that it is attracted to local maxima, it will tend to code together items that are transformationally similar.
 Finally, reference frame effects result from an attentional mechanism that is centered en a position within the analyzer space and a coding scheme, more fvlly specifiei elsewhere (Palmer, in press), that describes shape relative to the reference values of the frame.
 The fact that frame effects generally snow that global structure affects local structure more strongly than vice versa suggests that i^lotal information tends to dominate in determining the position 0*" the attentional frame.
 Higher order strcture of the whole configuration seems to strongly affect the placement of the reference frame and, therefore, to irfluence the resulting perception.
 In all of these phenomena it is clear that the system's preference for invariance ever transformations holds within the three dimensional space of the world.
 It nay held in the two dimensional space of images as well, bv.
t when the two conflict, the simpler three direriSional solution generally ("ominates.
 We have heen discussing the analysis of two dimensional Irages, and it is not entriely clear how to extend the proposal into the third dimension.
 Cne possibility woulo Ve to add serend, three dimensional level that ernbodied the same design features, t\;t in 6 higher dirensiondl i ty.
 Another woi:ld he tc translate the relevant simple '.
 ransf ormatio's in three dimensiors into their complex counterparts in two dim^nsicns.
 I do not yet have a well defined proposal to make or this rlfficiilt issue.
 The Importance of Systemic Structure refore closing, I want to say a few wrrds about ar.
 ini terestl "g; property of the theory quite apart from its ability (or laci thereof) to account for perceptual phenomena.
 I am intrigued by it systemic natrrp.
 The reader rey nave noticed that in explaining the theory I made almost r.
c reference to the specific nature of the analyzers that comprise the pieces of the system.
 At one point I said that they mii^ht be something like bar or edgedetectors, hut that was merely for illustrat ior.
.
 In fact, it makes very little difference what the analy?ers look like es long as they satisfy certain symmetry conditions: namely, they cannot be symmetrical about any transfornatien proposed to exist within the analyzer space.
 The reason shovld be clear.
 If the analyzers are invariant over a transformation, then that trarsformation canrot exist as a dimension within the analyzer space.
 For example, if all the analyzers were rotationally symmetric, as are circular centersurround receptive fields, then the system could not support the orientation dimension or the higher order rotational motion analyzers.
 In any case, the fact that the constraints on the system are so weak suggests that it is primarily the structure of the whole system that is doing the work.
 Indeed, this must be true if the basic building blocks of the system are transformational relations.
 Transformational relations are an emergent property of systems of analyzers; they are simply undefined for any individual analyzer without a systemic context of other analyzers.
 This suggests that the internal structure of individual analyzers might best be considered in terms of their functional role within the system.
 Further, the nature of the elements of the system might actually be determined by optimization of their fvnctional roles v>ithin the system as a whole (Palmer, in press).
 I think these are interesting and important notions for perceptual theory.
 They hark back to the gestalt claim that emergent properties of whole systems play the critical role in understanding perceptual phenomena.
 Perhaps they were right.
 REFERENCES Attneave, F.
 Some informational aspects of visual perception.
 Fsycholclegical Review.
 1954, 61, ie3l&3.
 Attneave, F.
 Triangles as ambiguous figures.
 American Journal of Psychelcgy.
 1966, 81, 447453.
 Cutting, J.
 Z.
 Coding theory adapted to gait perceptior.
 Journal rf Sxperimer.
tal Psychology: Huran perception t.
 1961,7; 7187.
 Tunker, K.
 Ueber induzierte Psycholcgishe Forschung.
 1929, 12.
 Performance.
 Eewegtrp;, Farrell, J.
 i.
 , i Fhepard, F.
 N.
 Shape, orientation, and apparent rotational motion.
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception .
̂  Performance.
 Ifiei, V, 477466.
 Garner, V.
 R.
 The processing of information and structure.
 Potomac, '̂d.
: Irlbaum, 1974.
 Hubel, L.
 H.
, ^ Wiesel, T.
 M.
 Receptive fields, binocular interaction, ard the functional architecture of the cat's visual cortex.
 Journal of Physiology (Icndoc).
 1^62, lee, iee154.
 Johansson, G.
 Ccnfi^uration ir event perception.
 Stockholm: Almqvist i luiksell, 195P.
 Johansson , G .
 Visual biological motion ard a analysis.
 Perception and 1973, _14.
, 2(^1211.
 perceptior, of model for its PsychoDhvsics.
 48 Losslyr.
, F.
 t̂.
 Cirlridge.
 19E1.
 faSS.
 IfTdige anrj ml nd .
 Harvard University Press, Leeuwenterg, E.
 L.
 J.
 A percepU'al codlrf language for visual and auditory patterns.
 Arerican Jcirnal of Psycholcgy.
 19''1, ?4, Z277t£.
 Ndvoi, r.
 ?crest tefcre trees: The frecpderce cf global features in visual perception.
 Cognitive Psychology.
 1£77, _9, Palmer.
 S.
 E.
 world kr.
cwledpe; sensorycognitive L .
 A .
 Nornar '* Visual perception and Notes en a model of interaction.
 Ii L.
 i.
 R'.
melhart (Scs.
), Explorations in cognition.
 •rlbeun, IfVS.
 :'illsdflle.
 N.
J.
: Palner, S.
 E.
 Hierarchical structure in perceptual representation.
 Co<<ni tive Psychology.
 1977, 9_, 441474.
 Pdlrer, S.
 E.
 What trakes triangles point: local and glotal effects in configurations of amhiguous triangles.
 Cognitive Psychology.
 1960, JJ.
, 2353f5.
 Palmer, S, E.
 Symnetry, transformation, and the strcture of perceptual systems.
 In J.
 Beck ?, F.
 "etelli (Eds.
), Representation and organization in :>crceution .
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
: Zrlhaum, in press.
 Palmer, S.
 E.
 Reference frames in shape perception.
 In preparation.
 Palmer, S.
 ?.
.
, s, Puch° r, N.
 l^.
 Configural effects in perceived poirling of ambiguous traingles.
 Journal of ETperimental Psychology: Human Perreptior.
 JL Ferfcrmancp, 1P91.
 7, 88114.
 Rock, I.
 Crientatior New York: Acafiemic Press, 1373.
 and form.
 Shepard, R.
 N.
 S, Judd, S.
 A.
 Perceptual illusion of rotation of three dimensional objects.
 Science.
 1976, 191, S5?954.
 t'allach H.
, kinetic depth O'Connell, E.
N.
 Journal effect.
 The Experimental Psycholcgy.
 1953, 4^.
 205217.
 Wertheimer.
 y.
.
 Untersuchungen zvr Lehre von der Gestalt.
 Psychologishe Forschvirf:.
 1923, J^ 3013SP.
 Translated in V.
 I.
 Ellis (ed.
j, A sourcebook of gestalt psychology.
 New York: Earcourt, Brace ^ Co.
, 1936.
 Weyl, H.
 Symmetry.
 Prince tor.
 N.
J.
: Princeton University Press, l&f;2.
 49 Rational Processes in Perception Alan Gilchrist and Irvin Rock In this paper we will give our reasons for believing that certain current attempts to explain perceptual phenomena on a lower level in terms of known sensorymechanisms are untenable.
 We will do this by focussing on two topics, lightness perception and the perception of apparent motion.
 We will summarize some older data (not all of which are sufficiently known) and will describe some recent work of our own.
 Finally, on a more positive note, we will try to indicate the direction that a theory must take if it is to deal effectively with these phenomena.
 Lightness Perception We will begin with the assumption that Helmholtz was essentially wrong in his belief that an object's lightness can be inferred by interpreting the luminance reflected by it to the eye in terms of the amount of illumination falling on it.
 Such a process requires unequivocal information about the illumination whereas the only information directly available is the intensity of light, or luminance, reflected by each surface in the field.
 Each such luminance is the joint product of the reflectance property of the surface and the illumination falling on that surface.
 Rather we will assume that the perceived shade of gray of a surface is governed primarily by the luminance of that surface relative to the luminance of neighboring surfaces as Hering (1920) suggested and as Wallach (ig'̂ S) elegantly demonstrated.
 There is now fairly wide agreement among investigators on this general principle.
 But what is the underlying explanation of it? There is great appeal in Bering's suggestion of reciprocal interaction, i.
e.
 that a bright region of the field would have a darkening effect on an adjacent region and a dark region would have a brightening effect on an adjacent regiori.
 We now know for a fact that the rate of discharge in one nerve fiber is attenuated when a neighboring fiber is stimulated by light.
 Thus such lateral inhibition can plausibly be invoked to explain why the appare.
'it lightness of one region is governed by the extent of stimulation of an adjacent region (see ^ornsweet, 197C; Jameson and Hurvich, 196'+).
 In fact, given lateral inhibition as a known sensory effect, one might have been able to predict the phenomenon of contrast, even if it had never been observed (although questions can be raised about the spatial distance over which such a mechanism can be expected to occur).
 Surrounding a gray region by a white one should lead to diminished discharging of retinal fibers stimulated by the gray region; surrounding another gray region of the same value by a black one should lead to increased discharging of retinal fibers stimulated by that gray region because of a release of inhibition.
 Thus one of these gray regions should look lighter than the other and so it does.
 An implicit assumption here is that the phenomenal shade of gray perceived in a given region is a direct function of the rate of discharging of fibers stimulated by that region.
 The fact of constancy of lightness can be explained along the same lines.
 When the illumination falling on a surface changes, then the luminance of all adjacent regions rises and falls together.
 Thus, while the rate of discharging of cells stimulated by a gray region should increase when illumination increases, so too should the rate of discharging of cells from a surrounding white region increase.
 The latter will increase the inhibition on the former with the net result of little if any change in the absolute rate of discharging of those cells.
 Therefore the perceived lightness should remain more or less constant and so it does.
 Note again, however, the assumption, here explicit, that the phenomenal lightness is a direct function of the rate of discharge of the appropriate fibers.
 50 Underlying this assumption is another assumption about how the visual system vorks that Gilchrist (1981) has called the photometer metaphor.
 Just as the signal produced by a photometer is a direct function of the light falling upon it, so the perceived lightness of each point in the field is assumed to be a direct function of the rate of discharging of the cells stimulated by each such point.
 With the knowledge that has been available about light, about the formation of the retinal image, and about photochemical processes and nerve physiology it is understandable why such a view has become so deeply ingrained as not even to be explicitly recognized as an assumption.
 Given this assumption, phenomena such as contrast and constancy, in which lightness does not correlate with luminance, seem to require an explanation long the lines of lateral inhibition.
 There is now, however, reason to reject this approach.
 Evidence has been accumulating to support the theory that the perception of lightness (and chromatic color) is based on information at the edges between regions of differing luminance (or hue).
 Homogeneous regions between edges are then "assumed" to have the lightness or color indicated by these edges.
 There is overwhelming evidence (Yarbus, 19^7; Whittle and Challands, 1969; J.
 Walraven, 1976) that the visual system responds to changes in stimulation, not to an unchanging state of stimulation.
 This is normally guaranteed by continuous eye movements, for vision.
' Whenever an image can be held stationary on the retina for a few seconds, all visual experience stops.
 These facts are inconsistent with the photometer metaphor and they strongly indirate the crucial nature of edges or gradients in the retinal image since this is where stimulation changes in the normal moving eye.
 Krauskopf (1963) has shown that when the boundary of a surface is prevented from moving on the retina, its color will disappear and be replaced by the color of the surrounding region, signalled by the boundary of that region.
 It seems unlikely that any absolute luminance information would be picked up in this way and yet it now seems quite possible that the visual system achieves what it does using only relative information.
 Even a simple edgerelations approach goes a long way toward explaining lightness constancy since the luminance ratio between two adjacent surface colors remains the same even when illumination changes.
 The important point here is that there is no need to invoke a concept such as lateral inhibition to explain constancy.
 Once the photometer assumption is made explicit and in fact, is displaced by the concept of edge information, the whole edifice collapses.
 Of course lateral inhibition is a wellestablished physiological fact.
 It is probably part of the process whereby the ratio at an edge is determined.
 But we don't believe that lateral inhibition solves any of the basic problems of constancy.
 The concept of an exaggeration or enhancement of edge ratios seems unnecessary and illogical.
 If lateral inhibition exaggerated an edge ratio, it would do so in the same way every time an edge of the same value were present on the retina.
 A given edge ratio would be specified by a given neural signal, with or without an exaggeration function.
 Therefore the exaggeration function doesn't seem to add anything of explanatory value.
 Certain problems turn out to be dissolvable pseudoproblems with the adoption of an edgerelations approach.
 One of these is constancy under changing illumination.
 On the other hand, other problems emerge, although they are more tractable.
 For example, how do we now explain the constancy of surface lightness as the surface is viewed against differing backgrounds? The luminance ratio at the edge of a surface can change irainatically as it is placed on different backgrounds and yet lightness perception retains alrr.
ô t unchanged.
 For example, ir.
 the classic example if lightness contrast, the gray s^^are on the white background has an eige ratio that is radically different (even uiposite ir.
 sign) froc that of the gray square on the black bac.
'orour.
d.
 Thus, under ̂  simple edge theory they ought to appear radically different in lightness, and yet they appear almost the same.
 This suggests that lightness is not letenuined simply by the boundary of a surface, t.
;t by tr.
e relationship between that boundary and other boundaries.
 Presumably the boundaries of the squares thenselves only signal departures from a background lightness, which in turn is signalled by the boundary of each baci'.
ground.
 Thus the edge dividing the white and black backgrounds signals the relationship between the two background lightnesses and we might expect that this edge will be as critical to the lightness of the targets as the edges of the targets themselves.
 In fact Gilchrist and Piantineda (unpublished experiment) have found that if that edge is retinally stabilized, the two gray squares turn black and white respectively, just what we would expect based simply on the ratios at the edges of the gray squares.
 We might say that the assignment of lightnesses to the various regions is the end result of a computational process in which information from all edges present is integrated.
 Arend (1973) and Land and McCann (l97l) have proposed similar schemes.
 If such computational processes occur and are governed by remote as well as local edge information, the reader may well wonder about the achievement of constancy.
 Consider the typical case where two gray disks of equal reflectance on the same background are unequally illuminated because one region and its immediate background are in shadow.
 Earlier we said that constancy could be explained on the basis of the equal ratio of each gray region to its background.
 That would be true in the example under consideration.
 But now we have also said that the presence of other edges enters into the equation.
 The shadow edge can easily have a ratio as great as a whiteblack edge and, more probably, even greater.
 If this is entered into the computation, constancy would fail; the disks would be seen as different shades of gray in accordance with the luminance difference between them.
 The equal disktosurround luminance ratios here logically cannot signify that the two grays are equal if the gray regions are seen as on backgrounds of different luminance values, or so it would seem.
 Unless the perceptual system can discriminate between reflectance edges and illumination edges, that is between changes in the pigment of the surface and changes in the amount of illumination shining on the surface.
 If so, perhaps illumination edges would not be included in the computation of surface lightness values.
 There is now strong evidence of just such discrimination of reflectance and illumination edges (Gilchrist, in press).
 If observers view the two disks 4nJrr the conditions just described, they typically do perceive the two grays as almost equal, i.
e.
 constancy is achieved.
 Moreover, they perceive both sides of the background as white with one side in shadow.
 Thus the central edge is apparently correctly identified as an illumination edge.
 If, however, the observers view the display through an aperture that permits only part of the background and the two gray regions to be seen, and if the edge of the shadow is reasonably sharp, the grays no longer look equal, constancy is destroyed.
 Moreover, the observers now perceive the two sides of the background as unequal in lightness.
 Thus the edge is interpreted as separating different reflectances, not different illuminations.
 In this condition only then does the central edge enter into the process of computing the lightness of the gray disks.
 We reported earlier that if the boundary between the black and white backgrounds in the traditional contrast pattern is made to disappear through retinal stabilization, one gray square turns black and the other turns white.
 This provides some of the best evidence for the concept of edge integration.
 A similar experiment was done by Gilchrist, et.
 al.
 (in press) that demonstrates the importance of the distinction between reflectance edges and illumination edges.
 When the boundary betv;een the white and black backgrounds is made to look like the edge of a shadow, the two squares will also turn black and white respectively, just as in the stabilizediir.
age experiment.
 Thus when an edge is identified as an illumination edge, it seems to drop out of the integration process for surface lightness just as if it were invisible.
 It would take us too far afield to enter "into a full discussion of precisely how the perceptual system discriminates illumination from reflectance edges.
 While the presence of penumbra at an illumination edge may be one source of information it is not the only one and is not necessary in the experiments just described.
 Before discussing the important role that depth perception plays in discriminating edges, it is worth considering the ramifications of what we have just discussed for the notion of lateral inhibition or any other theory of neural interaction which seeks to explain the important eft'ects of remote edges on what is perceived in regions adjacent to other edges.
 For now in addition to other difficulties such a theory faces, in dealing with such "remote" effects it would have to be argued that such effect do not occur at all when those remote edges are interpreted as representing illumination rather than reflectance differences.
 In fact, it is interesting to note that apparently no one has noticed that when contrast effects are applied to illumination edges, they not only fail to result in constancy, but they actually make matters worse.
 Constancy requires that we explain how the perception of surface lightness could be the same on both sides of an illumination edge, given the difference in luminance.
 Applying a mechanism here that further exaggerates the luminance difference is a little like bringing water to a drowning man.
 Recent experiments (Gilchrist, 1977, 198l) have demonstrated the role of depth perception in distinguishing an illumination edge from a reflectance edge.
 In one experiment an artificial interposition cue was used to make a target square appear as located either in a near plane, dimly illuminated, or in a far plane, brightly illuminated, as shown in Figure 1.
 In terms of the retinal image, the target square was always flanked by a surface of much lower luminance to its lower right and by a surface of much higher luminance to its upper left (note relative luminances given in Figure 1).
 In space, however, the low luminance surface was located in the near plane while the high luminance surface was located in the far plane.
 The results show that lightness is determined by the luminance ratio of the target square to its coplanar neighbor.
 Thus the target square looked ifhite when it appeared in the near plane but black when it appeared in the far plane.
 In other terms, the edge dividing the target from its coplanar neighbor was treated as a reflectance difference while the edge dividing the target from its noncoplanar neighbor was presumably treated as representing an illumination difference.
 Since the retinal image was essentially the same in both conditions, this result is inconsistent with an explanation based on lateral inhibition.
 In another experiment involving planes meeting to form a dihedral angle, these ideas were put to a more rigorous test in which predictions based on perceived coplanarity would be the opposite of predictions based solely on retinal ratios.
 The experimental arrangements are shown in Figure 2.
 In the horizontal plane, a black target tab extended out into space from a larger white square.
 In the vertical plane, a white target tab extended upward into space from a larger black square.
 Thus each target 51 ai67 9.
0 MEDIAN ^ ^ ^ H OBSERVER 3 5 ^ ^ ^ 1 MATCHES ^ H H B Figure 1 in tab was seen against the background square that was a separate plane.
 The horizontal surfaces received about 30 times as much illumination as the vertical surfaces, or just enough illumination difference to make the luminance of the black target tab equal to that of the white target tab.
 Given the viewing perspective of the observer, i»5 degrees from each plane, the display was similar to traditional contrast displays; two targets of equal luminance on bright and dark backgrounds respectively.
 Thus a theory based on lateral inhibition would clearly predict that the target on the bright background, in this case the upper target, should appear darker than the other target, although the exact magnitude of the effect is harder to determine.
 On the other hand, if lightness is really based on luminance relationships within planes, then each tab should be compared with the larger background square that lies in the same plane, even though it is adjacent only along one edge of the tab.
 Thus not only womld the coplanar ratio principle predict that the upper tab vjould appear lighter, not darker, than the lower tab, it would predict that the upper tab should look white and the lower tab black.
 In fact the latter result was actually obtained.
 Figure 2 shows the median Munsell matches {next to samples of those Munsell values) obtained from naive observers.
 Moreover, since the target tabs were actually trapezoidal in shape, they could be made to switch perceived planes when viewed monocularly.
 In that condition of the experiment the perceived lightnesses of the tabs also switched, with the lower tab now appearing white and the upper tab appearing black.
 Since these changes in perceived lightness were produced solely by a change in depth perception, with no change in the retinal image, these data raise difficulties that may be insurmountable for current theories based on lateral inhibition.
 STIMUIUS DISPtAY TARGET UPPER TAB LOWER TAB MONOCULAR RETINAL PATTERN (niATIVt lUMINANCU) T^^' '̂  \\ 30 MEDIAN OBSERVER MATCH MONOCULAR 3.
75 7.
75 BINOCULAR 8.
0 3.
0 Figure 2 Apparent Motion Although we know a good deal about the conditions that produce the illusory impression of motion referred to as apparent motion, we still do not understand why it occurs or, for that matter, why it only occurs under certain conditions.
 What we know about this effect is that given the sudden appearance of object £, its sudden disappearance, followed typically by just the right time interval of object _b in just the right new spatial location, one tends to see motion of a to b.
 The currently favored explanation is that a motiondetector cell in the brain will discharge even if the appropriate receptor field of the retina is stimulated discontinuously by two points rather than by a point moving over the retina.
 Such cells do seem to exist in various species of animals (GriisserCornehls, I968; Barlow and Levick, I965).
 However, the fact is that it is not necessarily the case that the conditions for apparent motion perception entail stimulation of separate retinal regions.
 Ordinarily that is the case, since a_ and h are in separate spatial locations and the eye is more or less stationary.
 What seems to matter is the perception of a and b in separate locations in space.
 To get at this question an experiment was performed in which the observers had to quickly move their eyes back and forth synchronous with the onset of a_ and b so that each stimulated the same central region of the retina, rather than as, more typically, two discretely different loci (Rock and Ebenholtz, 1962).
 Therefore, the conditions for apparent motion might be thought not to exist.
 Yet, the observer does locate & and bi in phenomenally discrete places in the environment.
 The result was that although nothing was said to the observers about motion that might create an expectation of perceiving motion, most of them nonetheless spontaneously did.
 This experiment seems to prove that, in humans at least, it is not necessary to explain stroboscopic motion in terms of a sensory mechanism that detects sudden change of retinal location.
 There is neither change of retinal nor cortical locus of projection of a and b here.
 An entirely different view that has been presented by Rock (1975) is that the impression of motion is a solution to the problem posed by the rather unusual stimulus sequence.
 First a_ inexplicably disappears.
 Then b inexplicably appears elsewhere.
 By "inexplicable" we 52 mean that when an object in the world disappears as we are looking at it, it is generally because another object moves in front of it or it is occluded by another object because of oiir motion.
 However, when a stationary object suddenly and rapidly moves to another location, it does tend to disappear from one location and to appear in another.
 Therefore, perhaps this state of affairs in a stroboscopic display suggests the solution of motion.
 Given that potential solution, the question arises as to whether it is acceptable.
 Motion from a to b does account for the brief stimulation by â  and _b, but isn't the absence of any visible object between the locus &_ and b a violation of the requirement that a solution be supported by what is present in the stimulus? If the solution is "a_ moving across space to b" doesn't this call for stimulus support in the form of continuously visible motion across that spatial interval? Ordinarily that would be true, but it is a fact that has been demonstrated that for very rapid motion of an actually displacing object, little more than a blur can be seen in the region between the terminal locations (Kaufman et al, 1971).
 In fact it was shown that if the terminal locations are occluded, no motion of a moving object is seen.
 Therefore when the spatial and temporal intervals between a and b̂  in a stroboscopic display are such as would correspond with the real motion of a rapidly displacing object, the absence of continuously visible movement need not act as a constraint against perceiving movement.
 In fact, this analysis may explain why slow rates of alternation do not lead to the impressions of motion.
 By "slow rate'' we mean a condition with a relatively long interval between the disappearance (offset) of a and the appearance (onset) of b.
 Such a rate would imply a slowly moving object and a slowly moving object would normally be seen throughout the spatial interval between a_ and b̂ .
 Therefore the absence of object motion over that interval at slow rates of alternation is a violation of the requirement of stimulus support.
 Hence the movement solution is not acceptable at slow rates even if the offset and onset:.
 tend to suggest this solution.
 While on this topic of rate we might briefly comment on the case where the alternation is very rapid, i.
e.
 a zero or only a minimum interval between the offset of â  and onset of b̂ .
 If the "on" time of a_ and b is itself very brief, this state of affairs will result in £ and _b being visible simultaneously by virtue of neural persistence.
 But if a_ is visible when h_ appears, the solution that a has moved to _b is not supported or one might say, is contradicted.
 This deduction war.
 tested by using rates of alternation that ordinarily dc produce the stroboscopic effect but with the following variation: First a appears, followed by the usual blank interval; when b appears so does a (in its original location).
 Therefore the sequence of events is: a; a_ and b,: a_; a and b̂ , etc.
 If the presence of a_ during the exposure of b violates the requirements of the motion solution, then observers should not achieve a strobosopic effect under these conditions.
 Our observers did not.
 If, however, the display is changed so that the a object that appears concurrently with b but in the same location as a is somewhat different tha;; the a_ that appears alone, observers d£ perceive a movi r; to b.
 The sequence is â ; a_' and b̂ , : a; a' and b; etc.
 Tt was :.
oted above that in the typical experiment on stroboscopic motion, a_ and b̂  inexplicably disappear and appear.
 What was meant was that no rationale is provided to the observer of why they appear and disappear such as is the case when things in the environment auddenly appear or disappear because another object in front suddenly moves out of the way or in the way.
 This suggested the following kind of experiment.
 Suppose we cause the retina to be stimulated by a and _b in just the right places at just the right tempo, etc.
 , but by a method in which we move an opaque object back and forth, alternately covering and uncovering a and b.
 h — H W m » m m .
 r ' ' % f".
 ' * t ' Figure 3 (See Figure 3B) As far as the sensory theory of apparent motion Is concerned there is no obvious reason why these conditions should not produce an impression of â  and ^ moving.
 But from the standpoint of problem solving theory, we have now provided an explicable basis for the alternate appearar;ce and disappearance of a.
 and b_, namely, that they are there all the time but undergoing covering and uncovering.
 Therefore the perceptual system may prefer this solution or at least we are offering it a viable alternative not usually available (see Ftoper, I96I*; Sigraan and Rock, 197'*).
 The subjects rarely perceived motion of the dots here.
 Some may object that the presence of the actually moving rectangle interfered in some way with perceiving stroboscopic motion.
 It is, after all, an unusual, atypical, way of studying such motion.
 The rectangle may draw the subjects' attention or otherwise inhibit motion perception of the dots.
 For this reason a slight change was introduced, one that had another purpose to it as well.
 Suppose the rectangle moves, but a bit too far, far enr.
 ugh no longer to be in front of where the dot had been.
 But by a method, the details of which need not be discussed here, things were so arranged that when the rectangle is in its terminal location, the dot is nonetheless not visible.
 Now it is no longer a fitting or intelligent solution to perceive a and b̂  as two permanently present dots that are simply undergoing covering and uncovering.
 For it can be seen that in fact the rectangle is not covering the spot in its terminal location and yet the spot is not visible (violation of the stimulussupport requirement).
 Therefore the best solution is again one of 53 movement and that is what the subjects perceived.
 Note that this experiment serves as a control for the objection raised to the first one; the moving rectangle here does not interfere with perceiving motion of the dots.
 Another variation performed is based on the idea that for the coveringuncovering solution to be viable, the covering object must appear to be opaque.
 If it does not, it can hardly be covering anything.
 This factor was manipulated in an experiment illustrated in Figure 3B.
 The actual stimulus conditions are very similar but in one case, because the oblique lines within the rectangle are stationary and aligned with all the others, the rectangle looks like a hollow wire perimeter.
 In a control condition the lines inside it moved with the rectangle, and it looked like an opaque object.
 The difference in results is very clear: when the rectangle appeared to not be opaque, subjects by and large perceived movement whereas in the oase of the opaqueappearing rectangle, they did not.
 A hollow rectangle is in contradiction of the property of opacity "•jequired by the coveringuncovering solution.
 In a final experiment, conditions were such that no physical contours at all moved back and forth in front of the dots.
 There was, however, a phenomenally opaque object that moved, one based on illusory contours, as illustrated in Figure 3C.
 The great majority of subjects did not perceive movement.
 In a control experiment, illustrated in Figure 3D, the orientation of the corner fragments was changed so that no subjective rectangle was perceived and this array was moved back and forth.
 Wow the majority of subjects did perceive movement.
 It should be noted that in all these cases where a coveringuncovering effect is perceived there is no reason why movement of the dots could not have been perceived a.
 well.
 That is to say, if the observer were to see an opaque rectangle moving back and forth and, simultaneous with this, a dot stroboscopically moving in the opposite direction, such a solution would also account for the stimulus sequence.
 Conversely everything implied by that solution is represented in tie stirLuius, and no contradictory perception is occurring.
 Therefore the tendency to perceive dots uiidergoing occlusion and disocclusion rather than dots roving, represents a preference for one solution over t:x other.
 The preferred solution is obviously related to a very basic characteristic of percei.
tion, namely, olject permanence, the tendency to assume the continued presence or existence of an object even when it is I'loner.
tarily not visible for one reason or another.
 But given the very strong predilection we have to perceive appare.
nt aotior.
 even ur.
i~r * he most unlikely conditions, it remains a problem as to why it is not perceived in this sitation and the objectpermanence solution i.
̂  preferred.
 A possible answer ii that the coverin̂ ̂uncoverin/; sol .
it ion accojnts for all stimulus change by one "cause": a raovi.
ng rectangle covering and uncovering spots that ar<r co::tinuously present.
 The other solution entails two i.
nde; tnient events that are coincidentally and unaccou:itably correlated; a rectangle moving in one direction and in antiphase to spots moving in the opposite dirfCtiDC.
 There is another line of eviderice that also strongly SJpports a problemsolving interpretation of stroboscopic motion.
 If the stimulus ?o:!sists oi rior; than a single dot or line, the problem arises of what in a is seen moving to what in t_.
 To mak the point clear, suppose that a and b̂  each consist of a twobythree matrix of dots.
 What will be seen here is the rectangular grouping moving as a whole (Ternus, 19'^b).
 Appare:.
tly the perceptual system seeks a movement solution that will do justice to the object ^s a whole.
 Indeed, wjre this not the case, the motion perceived in moving pictures would be quite chaotic, because it is typically objects consisting of many parts that change location from frame to frame (and often many such objects are simultaneously changing locations in either the same or varying directions).
 Yet this outcome is not predictable at all in terms of the other kinds of sensory theories mentioned earlier.
 A related example is the perception of motion of complex stimuli such as the line drawings of threedimensional cuboid figures that Shepard and his associates have used in the mental rotation studies.
 Shepard and Judd (1976) presented two perspectives of such figures in a stroboscopic motion paradigm and showed that, at the appropriate rate of alternation, observers perceive these objects rotating through the angle necessary to account for the change in perspective from a to b.
 This effect clearly implies that the perceptual system deals with the problem of accounting for the differences in a and h by an intelligent motion solution.
 A further finding of interest is that the optimum rate of alternation for achieving a continuous coherent rotation of a rigid whole object was an inverse function of the angular difference as implied by the two perspectives views.
 In other words, the greater the angle through which rotational motion was seen, the slower the rate of alternation had to be.
 This finding can be considered to be in keeping with one of Korte's Laws which states that optimum apparent motion is preserved when the spatial separation between presentations of &_ and b̂  is increased by increasing the time interval between presentation of a and b.
 This law makes sense if one assumes that the perceived speed of rotation is constant.
 If therefore the mental representation of the object has to rotate through a greater angle, more time is required.
 Further support for this interpretation is provided by an experiment which asked the following question: Is it the retinal spatial separation or the perceived spatial separation that governs Korte's Lav? Perceived separation was varied by creating conditions in which a and b appeared at differing distance but were always located so as to project to the eye in the same retinal loci (Corbin, 19l*2; Attneave and Block, 19T3).
 The experiments demonstrated that it was the perceived spatial separation, not the retinal separation that enters into Korte's Law.
 A problemsolving theory can account for these facts.
 It offers an explanation of why motion is seen.
 Unlike other theories, it takes as a point of departure and is quite compatible with the fact that the conditions leading to motion perception entail change of perceived location rather than change of retinal location.
 It offers a rationale for the known facts about alternation, i.
e.
 why movement is perceived only within a certain range of middle values of interstimulus interval.
 It can 'ieal easily with the kinds of perceived transformations or movements that occur when £ and _b are more than single dots or lines, such as groupings or forms with subparts, or complex threedimensional figures in differing orientations.
 Finally it permits us to predict instance? where no motion will be perceived despite the maintenance of the spatial and temporal parameters that ordinarily produce the stroboscopic effect.
 On the other hand this theory does not as yet explain all the known facts.
 It does not explain the reported findings that motion is seen more readily if "aoth a_ and b are placed so that their projections fall within one hemisphere of the brain (Gengerelli, I9I48); nor does it explain why the effect is more readily obtained if a_ and b̂  stimulate one eye compared to the case where a_ stimulates one eye and _b the other (Ammons and Weitz, 1951).
 However, the.
= e findings have never been replicated and wajrant careful reexamination.
 And finally a problemsolving theory might be considered to be inappropriate as an explanation of the stroboscopic effect that seems to occur in decorticated guinea pigs fSmith, 19̂ *0} or newly born lower organisms such as 54 fish or insects (Rock, Tauter, and Heller, 1965).
 However there now seems to be fairly good evidence that there are two kinds of apparent motion (Broddick, 1971*; Anstis, 1980).
 One kind, referred to as the shortrange process, occurs over very small angular separations of a and b.
 There is reason for believing that this kind may be based on motiondetector neurons responsive to a small shift in stimulation on the retina.
 The other kind, referred to as the longrange process, occurs over larger angular separation of a and b.
 This process is probably not based on the activation of nctiondetector neurons.
 Most if not all of the evidence discussed above pertains to this longrange process.
 The shortrange process thus seems to have a direct sensory basis whereas the longrange process seems to have a cognitive basis.
 In the light of this distinction, it is possible that the findings referred to in the previous paragraph are explicable in terms of the shortrange process.
 Conclusion At this point we should step back from these empirical studies and see what general lessons can be drawn as to the nature of theories of perception.
 If the visual system is to achieve a faithful representation of the physical world then the organization of its own processes must somehow mirror the organization of the world.
 Any theory of perception that does not take this point into account will ultimately fail.
 In certain theories of perception, constancy and veridicality are fortuitous outcomes that occur only under some circjmstances.
 This is not good enough.
 Both the logic of what the perceptual system must accomplish and the emperical evidence of what it does achieve demand a theory in which constancy is inevitable, not accidental.
 Herein lies the danger of theories based on simple and limited physiological findings.
 Unless the physiological finding can be seen as part of a larger process that "horaesin" on reality in an inevitable way, that physiological finding is likely to be misunderstood.
 This is the problem with viewing lateral inhibition as an exaggeration or distortion process.
 If we cling to the photometer metaphor, to the assumption that fundamentally the visual system measures the intensity (and perhaps the wavelength) of the light at each point in the image, then it is not surprising that some kin3 of distortion process will be required to transform the array of photometer readings into something vaguely representing visual experience.
 There is no need to talk as though the intensity of light at point A in the image is "affected" by the intensity of light at point B.
 The fact is that the light at point A, seen by itself, would be perceptually meaningless.
 Having a second intensity of light present in the visual field doesn't merely change the first amount of light, it literally establishes a relationship and the apprehension of thi.
=; relationship produces lightness perception in its simplest form.
 Ci.
ntrast theories are usually thought to be relational theories, but they are not.
 As Koffka (1935) has correctly pointed out, the ultimate correlate of lightness perception in a contrast theory is still an absolute amount of light, iiot a relationship.
 The contrast process only allows the absolute value of one region of the field to be changed as a Tjnction of other values.
 But it is still that absolute value that reigns.
 And the reason that it has to be changed is that as an absolute value, it will always be out of touch with visual experince, which involves relationships.
 In fact the l;i:tory of theories of lightness perception is the history of different correction factcrs designed to bring the local luminance into correlation with perceived lightness.
 This has never worked and it is time we recognize that no theory based on absolute amounts of light can work.
 What is constant about a white surface, for instance, is its relationship to the rest of its environment.
 It is not surprising that the visual system gets its critical information from the edge.
 This is the point in the image where the relationship between two amounts of light is represented.
 In more complex scenes each local edge relationship, or ratio, has to be seen in relation to other edge ratios.
 The concept of edge integration that we have discussed does not involve any distortion or exaggeration process.
 Rather it involves the proper organizing of certain local relationships in order to make explicit a more global relationship that was only implicit in the local relationships.
 At the level of cognition the same function is served formally by the syllogism.
 Fundamentally the visual system must be logical because the world is logical.
 The world is not put together in a random or capricious way.
 If a rectangular object is incapable of obscuring a set of diagonal lines it will also be incapable of obscuring a luminous spot.
 How inefficient it would be if local percepts were allowed to coexist with other local but contradictory percepts.
 A system that excludes contradictions from its global relationships has the tremendous advantage of reducing the ambiguity of its local relationships.
 Perception and cognition seem to share this quality of excluding contraditions within their own domains.
 Of the two, however, perception seems to be the more successful.
 Of course it is possible to construct figures such as impossible triangles, or Escher drawings, which surprise us by the extent to which visual contradictions are tolerated.
 But it is the rareness of such visual contradictions that leads to our delight at such figures.
 Examples in which the cognitive system fails to exclude contradictions are unfortunately too numerous to mention.
 One only needs to turn to political speeches, or the Bible, or journal articles to find a gold mine of examples.
 Seeing, then, is like thinking, at least in many of its formal properties, and this may be because thinking is like seeing.
 That is,seeing may be the primitive form of thinking, the basic prototypical form that shows how relationships are to be integrated in order to correctly represent the world.
 Seeing, of course, had to come first, and it must be there even in mosquitoes.
 Thinking, however, allows us to integrate relationships that extend beyond the time and space limitations of the visual system.
 Perhaps the world looks the way it looks because we are what we are physiologically.
 But it should not be forgotten that the world existed before we did and thus, as we learn from evolution, we are what we are becaise the world is what it is.
 55 THE ROLE OF SPATIAL VORKING tEtOm IN SHAPE PERCEPTION Geollrey £• Hinton tSC Applied Psychology Unit Cambridge, England AIE1RACT Ihree demonstrations are presented and used to support a number of apparently unrelated claims about the internal rejresentations that people have when they perceive or imagine a spatial structure.
 The first demonstration illustrates properties of the spatial working memory that enables us to integrate successive glimpses of parts of an object into a coherent whole.
 The second demonstration shows that our ability to generate a mental image is severely limited by the form of our knowledge of the shape of an object.
 The third shows that the shape representation which we create when we attend to a whole object does not involve creating the kinds of shape representations for the parts of the object that we would form if we attended to them and saw them as wholes in their own right.
 Ihe real motivation for this medley of demonstrations and for the interpretations offered is that these phenomena can all be seen as manifestations of a particular kind of parallel mechanism which is described briefly in the last sectiori.
 I PERCEPTION THROIGH A PEEPHOLE Fig.
 1 illustrates a phenomenon called anorthoscopic perception that occurs when people perceive an object one piece at a time through a slit or peephole (Hochberg, 1968).
 Lnder suitable conditions peojle report that they have a perceptual experience of the whole object.
 They somehow integrate a number of separately perceived pieces into a single Gestalt.
 This means that they must be storing internal records of their perceptions of the individual pieces.
 Ihe simplest theory of anorthoscopic perception is that the subject builds up an internal, picturelike representation part by part, and then uses this internal "picture" as a substitute for a retinal image in identifying the whole object.
 As we shall see, this theory has problems.
 d ) Figure 1.
 A cartoon strip showing a peephole moving around the outline of a shape.
 Ihe fact that successive frames in the cartoon fall in different positions makes the task harder.
 Retinabased versus scenebased frames In the early stages of visual processing, the size, position and orientation of parts of the visual input are represented relative to the frame of reference defined by the retina.
 Anorthoscopic perception, however, cannot depend on storage in these early, "retinabased" representations because people typically fixate on the peephole, so all the different pieces of the object project to the same bit of the retina (Rock, 1981).
 Representations that encode the positions of the pieces relative to the retina would not allow us to perceive the whole object because the relative position of a piece within the whole is determined by where the peephole is, not by where the piece falls on the retina.
 It is just conceivable that as we move our eyes, the internal records of all the previously perceived pieces are correspondingly altered so that the records always encode where the piece is relative to the current retinal position, but this seems very unlikely.
 What is needed is a way of representing where the pieces are that is not affected by eyemovements or even by movements of the whole person through space (Turvey, 1977).
 This can be achieved by using a temporary scenebased frame of reference that is defined by some larger contextual object or configuration within the external scene.
 If we keep a continually updated representation of the relationship between the retina and this scenebased frame, we can use it to convert from positions on the retina into positions relative to the scene before storage.
 Ihese positions relative to the scene will be unaffected by subsequent eye or body movements.
 Obviously the scenebased frame will have to change from time to time, and it will have to have a scale that is appropriate to the scale of the parts we are attending to, but over a period of a second or two, perceptual integration of the results of successive fixations could be achieved by using a single scenebased frame of reference.
 Postcategorical versus atomistic representations In a picturelike representation, the shapes of objects are not explicitly represented — it requires an interpretive process to extract them.
 Consider, for example, how a straight line is represented in an array.
 Ihe line is decomposed into "atomic" fragments each of which is depicted by filling in one cell in the array.
 The absolute positions of the individual atomic fragments relative to the whole array are encoded directly and precisely, but there is no direct encoding of the straightness of the line, because this depends on the relative positions of the various fragments.
 Ising this kind of atomic depiction it is impossible to represent the fact that a line is straight without representing precisely where it is relative to the whole array.
 It is impossible to be precise about shape and vague about position in a picturelike representation.
 Ihe memory used in anorthoscopic perception.
 56 however, seems to allov just this combination of jrecisioD and vagueness.
 If a peephole is moved around a polygonal spiral (see Pig.
 2) people often "perceive" a closed polygon.
 Iheir memory for the precise locations of the individual sides is poor and can he swayed by expectations about closed polygons, but they know that the sides are straight.
 This informal evidence that spatial working memory can be more precise about the shapes of pieces than about their positions implies that it contains explicit representations of shapes rather than being a picturelike collection of atomistic local features in which shapes are only implicit.
 A recent experiment supports this conclusion.
 < ^ •ŝ  ^ ^ ^ ^ Figure 2.
 A peephole is moved around a polygonal spiral without revealing the free ends or the adjacent parallel sides.
 Cirgus, Gellrasn, and Hochberg (1961) have shown that it is considerably easier to "see" the shape of a whole object if the peephole is moved around the outline of the object than if the peephole jumps randomly from one part of the outline to another.
 The two different conditions were balanced so that ihe total exposure to any one part of the object was identical, so the contents of a picturelike store would be equally good in both cases.
 Ihe obvious interpretation of this experiment is that when neighbouring parts of an object are exposed in succession, it is possible to form more complex chunks (shapes) and hence to reduce the number of chunks that must be stored in spatial working memory.
 When successive exposures are of widely sejafXei pieces, either no chunks are formed, or chunks are created which do not correspond to the natural parsing of the whole object into parts.
 This type of explanation implies that the memory involved contains explicitly segmented and identified chunks.
 II THE CUBE TASK Hinton (1979) describes an apparently simple mental imagery task that people cannot do: "Imagine a wireframe cube resting on a tabletop with the front face directly in front of you and perpendicular to your line of sight.
 Imagine the long diagonal that goes from the bottom, front, lefthand corner to the top, back righthand one.
 Now imagine the cube is reoriented so that this diagonal is vertical and the cube is resting on one corner.
 Elace one fingertip about a foot above a tabletop and let this mark the position of the top corner on the diagonal.
 Ihe corner on which the cube is resting is on the tabletop, vertically below your linpertip.
 l«ith your other hand point to the spatial locBtioi.
s of the other corners of the cube.
" It is.
 fairly easy to imagine a cube in just about any orientation if the orientation is defined in terms of the natural axes of the cube.
 lut when the diagonal is used to define the required orientation, we realise that relative to the diagonal, we have no clear idea where the various parts of the cube are.
 Our knowledge of the spatial dispositions of the parte of a cube is relative to the "intrinsic" frame of reference defined by the cube's own axes.
 Knowledge in this form is ideal for recognising the shape of a rigid object because whatever Ihe object's actual size, position and orientation, the dispositions of its parts will always be the same relative to an intrinsic frame of reference based on the object itself (Palmer, 197̂ ; Marr and Nishihara, 1978).
 So if the appropriate objectbased frame can be imposed, the early retinatased representations which encode the positions of the parts relative to the retina can be receded into objectbased representations and this encoding will constitute a viewpointindependent shape description that allows the object to be recognised.
 I have now appealed to three different sorts of reference frame.
 The initial processing of the visual input uses representations relative to the retina; recognition of the shape of an object involves receding these early retinabased representations into ones that are relative to an objectbased frame; and anorthoscopic perception relies on storing the relationships of recognised shapes to a temporary scenebased frame.
 Ill FRUITFACE Fig.
 5 shows a face composed entirely of pieces of fruit.
 Palmer (1975) reports that when subjects are shown this figure very briefly, they see it as a face without seeing the parts as fruit.
 The fruitface figure demonstrates that forming the Gestalt for a face does not depend on forming Gestalts for the parts.
 This is puzzling because to see the face we must form some representations of the parts and their relationships to the whole, since it is the relative dispositions of the parts within the whole that make it a face.
 Cne possibility which has not been much explored is that each part of the face can have two quite different internal representations.
 When the part is seen as a constituent of the face it receives a representation in which it is interpreted as filling the role of, say, an eye because of its crude overall shape and iT3 relation to the whole face.
 When it is seen as a whole in its own right, however, it receives a quite different internal representation in which the rough shapes and dispositions of its parts cause it to be seen as a piece of fruit.
 ^^^m^ 4 i ^ Figure ̂ .
 P face composed entirely of pieces of fruit .
 (After Palmer, 1975) 57 The idea thai an objecl receives a quite different internal representation when it becomes the object of focal attention does not fit the jojular view of attention as a kind of internal sjotlight which can illuminate any one of a number of otherwise unconscious shape representations.
 However, the idea is very compatible with "early selection" theories (Triesman and Gelade, 1980) in which focal attention is constructive and is necessary for the generation of a shape representation .
 reference and representing the size, position, and orientation of each part of the object relative to this frame.
 3.
 The representation that an object receives when it is seen as a Gestalt and its shape is recognised is completely different from its representation when it is seen as a constituent of a larger Gestalt.
 Only one Gestalt can be formed at a time, but many separate records of previous Gestalts can be stored in spatial working memory.
 obvious that the coexist with the Introspection is The internal spotlight metaphor for visual attention is a powerful one, but I believe it is based on a mistaken analogy between external perception and introspection.
 Normally our attention moves rapidly and smoothly from one level to another and we do not realise that at any instant we are attending at just one level.
 Cnly when the information at the different levels is made inconsistent, as in the fruitface, does it become Gestalt for the whole cannot Gestalts for its parts.
 of little use for deciding what is in our minds at one brief instant because it does not allow us to decide between two possibilities.
 Either there are shape representations that lurk outside focal attention, or shape representations are generated or regenerated the moment we ask ourselves whether they are there.
 Our fundamental epistemological assumption that the existence of objects is independent of our awareness of them cannot be applied to the contents of our own minds.
 An obvious objection to any theory which claims that people only see one shape at a time is that the shape of an object is determined by the shapes of its parti and their dispositions relative to the whole.
 This kind of recursive definition of a shape in terms of the shapes of its parts leads to a regress that only terminates at hypothetical "primitive" features.
 The fruitface figure is important because it suggests an alternative way out of the regress.
 The representations of the parts that are used in perceiving the shape of the whole may be different in kind from the representations used to perceive the shapes of the parts when we attend to them.
 Naturally, different shape representations must be able to influence one another.
 Having recognised an eye it should be easier to see the whole face, but this influence could be mediated by spatial working memory.
 Although only one Gestalt can be formed at a time, records of many previous Gestalts can be kept in working memory and used to influence the formation of the next Gestalt.
 IV VHAT THE DEMONSTRATIONS ShOV The demonstrations have been used as evidence for the following cleims: 1.
 Ve integrate the information obtained in successive glances by storing records of the shapes that we identify and their relationships to a temporary scenebased frame of reference.
 We can use these stored records to generate nev shape represen ta tions .
 2.
 The process of recognising a shaj«i (forming a Gestalt) involves imposing an otjecttssed frame of V A MCHAUISK FOR SPATIAL REPRESQITATICN £ There is not space here to d various kinds of mechanism that for representing spatial struct describe one possibility which use of parallel interactions be of features.
 This kind of compu natural way of harnessing the c provided by a system like the b number of richly interconnected parallel (Anderson and Hinton, is based on four related assump iecuEs all the have been suggested ures.
 I shall simply is designed to make tween very large sets tation seems to be a omputational power rain in which a large units all compute in 1961 ) .
 The mechanism tions: 1.
 A perceptual feature must always be represented relative to some frame of reference because properties like the length, position, and orientation of a feature implicitly assume a reference frame.
 2.
 At any moment during perception we use three different frames of reference  retinabased, objectbased, and scenebased — so our perceptual apparatus has three different sets of units, each of which represents features relative to one of these frames of reference.
 3.
 The meaning of features relative to one frame of reference in terms of features relative to another depends on the relationship between the two frames.
 So the way in which units in one set affect units in another set must be controlled by a representation of the spatial relationship between the frames of reference used by the two sets.
 A particular spatial relationship pairs each unit in one set with one unit in the other set, and allows activity in one of these units to cause activity in the other.
 4.
 Lifferent Gestalts correspond to alternative patterns of activity in the very same set of objectbased units.
 So only one Gestalt can be formed at a time, though records of many previous Gestalls can be stored as activity in the scenebased units.
 lig.
 4 incorporates these assumptions.
 Unlike many box diagrams in psychology, the separate boxes really are intended as separate collections of hardware units.
 Every linit continually recomputes its activity level as a function of the input it receives from other units.
 In the short term (i .
e in about ICO msec) , the whole system computes by settling into a state of activity that is temporarily stable.
 This kind of settling process is described in more detail in Hinton (19&1 b) where it is shown that the process of assigning an appropriate objedtased frame of reference can be implemented by the threeway inleraction between retinabased units, objectbased units and 1he units for representing the spatial relationship between 58 the retins and Ihe object.
 This kind of three way interaction ie what the triangular eymtols in Fig.
 4 dejict.
 After each settling, control jroceesee (unspecified here) can reset the pattern ol aclivity in any set of units, and thereby initiate a new proceES of settling.
 Not all the unite in a set need be involved in the interactions with other sets, for examjle, the objedtased units that are directly affected by retinabased units probably code fairly simple features, whereas the objectbased units that directly affect the scenebased ones probably code complex conjunctions of the simpler features.
 Scenebased units.
 Active units encode recently identified shapes and their rellations to the scene Units whose activity represents the relationship of the current objectbased frame to the current scenebased frame.
 Objectbased units.
 Pattern of activity represents shape of the current Gestalt \ L > Units whose activity represents the relationship of the current objectbased frame to the retinabased frame F.
etinabased units.
 Activity pattern is the result of early visual processing.
 Figure 4.
 A parallel mechanism, 5his kind of mechanism raises many interesting issues, some of which are discussed elsewhere (Hinton, igeia) .
 Ihe following section focusses on what the scenebased features are like, and how they influence the the formation of a new Gestalt, i.
e.
 how they affect the formation of temporarily stable pattern of activity in the objectbased units.
 Scenebased features Once the general approach of implementing spatial working memory as activity in a set of scenebased units is accejted, quite a lot can be deduced about the nature of the units from their function.
 One important function of spatial working memory is to allow previously identified Gestalts to aid in the formation of related Gestalts.
 Having recognised an eye, the whole face should be easier to see, and vice versa.
 Ihe kind of precisely located, atomistic features that would be needed for a picturelike representation would not be of much value in spatial working memory, because they would not explicitly represent the identities of objects, and so their effects could not be made to depend on these identities.
 It is more useful to make each aciive scenebased unit represent the existence of an object of a particular type with a particular relationship to the current scene, as the following examples show.
 Suppose that as a result of previous perceptual analysis, activity in a scenebased unit, 11 , represents the existence of an eye with the relationship Fj^ to the scene.
 Suppose also that the system is now attempting to settle on an interpretation of a larger object (a face) with the relationship Fyj to the scene, hig and hfs determine hlf , the relationship of the eye to the face, and so they determine which objectbased unit, Cj , should be activated to represent the eye as a constituent relative to the frame of reference of the whole face.
 This influence of the contents of working memory on perception can be implemented (see lig.
 4) by having an explicit representation of Pfj which governs the interaction between scenebased and objectbased units and ensures that activity in £j provides excitatory input to Ci .
 Now consider what is required of spatial working memory if the face is seen first and attention is then focussed on one eye.
 !Ihe fact that this part had the role of an eye within the whole face should facilitate its interpretation as an eye when it becomes the focus of attention.
 Ibis effect can be achieved if the Gestalt for the whole face activates scenebased units that represent the major constituents of the Gestalt as well as the whole.
 £0 the mapping from objectbased to scenebased units operates simultaneously on imits that represent the identity of the whole Gestalt and on units representing its major constituents.
 VI CONCIUSION Three demonstrations have been used to illustrate aspects of our internal representations of spatial structures.
 Particular attention has been given to the spatial working memory that allows people to integrate their perception over time.
 It has been argued that this memory contains compact records of the rich perceptual Gestalts that are fonned when a person attends to an object.
 Ihe interactions between spatial working memory and the apparatus in which Gestalts are formed allows previous Gestalts to influence (or entirely determine) the formation of the current Gestalt even though only one Gestalt can be present at a time.
 This view of the role of spatial working memory supports "early selection" theories in which focal attention is required to synthesize a shape, and only one shap)e can seen at a time.
 It also supports the view that different Gestalts correspond to alternative patterns of activity in a set of units that encode features relative to a frame of reference imposed on the object.
 Finally, a few provisos.
 The demonstrations are well known but the interpretations of what they show are probably contentious, and the mechanism I suggest is speculative and underspecified.
 There has not been space to elaborate on many interesting issues like how the mechanism might account for the experimental data on mental rotation (Cooper and Shepard, 1975) or spatial working memory (Eroadbent and Eroadbent, 1981; Phillips and Christie, 1977).
 Nor has it been possible to discuss crucial 59 theoretical issues like the number of units that would be required by the mechanism, or the problems of encoding novel shapes in working memory.
 ACKNOWLEIXJEMENTS I thank Steve Traper, Ed Hutchins, Tony yiarcel, Don Korman, Dave Kumelhart, Tim Shallioe, Joanne Sharp and Aaron Sloman for useful discussions.
 Many of the ideas presented here were developed while I was a Visiting Scholar at the Program in Cognitive Science at the University of California, San Diego, supported by a grant from the Sloan Foundation.
 Triesman, A.
 M.
 A Gelade, G.
 A featureintegration theory of attention.
 Cognitive Psychology, 1980, 2£, 97156.
 Turvey, M.
 T.
 Contrasting orientations to the theory of visual information processing.
 Psychological Review, 1977, 84, 6788.
 REFERENCES Anderson J.
 A.
 & Hinton, G.
 E.
 Models of information processing in the brain.
 In G.
 E.
 Hinton & J.
A.
 Anderson (Eds.
) Parallel models of associative memory.
 Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1981.
 Broadbent, I.
 E.
 & iroadbent, M.
 H.
 P.
 Recency effects in visual memory.
 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1981 , 53A.
.
 115.
 Cooper, 1.
 A.
 & Shepard , F.
 N.
 Chronometric studies in the rotation of mental images.
 In W.
 G.
 Chase (Ed.
), Visual information processing.
 Kew Tfork: Academic Press, 1975.
 Girgus, J.
 S.
 Gellman, I.
 H.
 & Hochberg, J.
 The effect of spatial order on piecemeal shape recognition: A developmental study.
 Perception and PsychophysicE, 1980, 28, 133138.
 Hinton, G.
 E.
 Some demonstrations of the effects of structural descriptions in mental imagery.
 Cognitive Science, 19'9, 3, 231250.
 Hinton, G.
 E.
 Shape representation in parallel systems.
 To appear in Proc.
 IJCAI81 1981a.
 Kintm, 'V.
 ;.
 A parallel computation that assigns canonical objectbased frames of reference.
 To appear in Proc.
 IJCAI81.
 Vancouver, Canada, 1981 t.
 Hochberg, J.
 In the mind's eye.
 In R.
 K.
 Haber (Ed.
) Contemporary theory and research in visual perception, hev ^ork: Holt, Finehart and Winston, 1968 X.
arr, I.
 & Kishihara, H.
 K.
 Representation and recognition of the spatial organisation of threedimensional shapes.
 Proc.
 Roy.
 Soc.
 Series _E , 19,£, 200, 269294.
 Palmer, S.
 E.
 Visual perception and world knowledge: Kotes on a model of sensory cognitive interaction.
 In I.
 A.
 Korman & D.
 E.
 Rumelhart (Eds.
), Explorations in cognition.
 San Francisco: Freeman, 19V5.
 Phillips, V.
 A.
 & Christie, I.
 F.
 M.
 Components of visual memory.
 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1977, 29.
, 117134Rock, 1.
 Anorthoscopic perception.
 Scientific American, March 1981, 244, 103111.
 60 COLOR PERCEPTION AND THE MEANINGS OF COLOR WORDS Paul Kay University of California, Berkeley The relation between perception and meaning is hard to trace in any domain.
 I have been asked today to discuss the problems of identifying such connections in the domain of color.
 Color is an area in which our ignorance regarding the relation of perception and linguistic meaning is less than total; nonetheless you will not be surprised to learn that here, as elsewhere, there are more questions than answers.
 In the time available I will be able to do no more than sketch one view of the matter and so will probably present a clearer picture than is in fact warranted by current knowledge.
 In particular there will be little time to discuss the detailed empirical evidence that supports this view and no time to discuss alternative views.
^ I will begin by describing in lamentably oversimplified terms certain structures in the human visual system that give rise to the sensation of color.
 We will then see how these aspects of visual physiology can help us understand independent findings regarding the meanings of words for color in the world's languages.
 In particular, starting from the simple arithmetic of differential firing rates of certain individual types of cells in the visual system, we are able to build a model of the perceptual categorization of color that explains a good deal both about crosslinguistically universal features in color naming and about dimensions of difference among the classifications of color found in the languages of the world.
 Finally we will see how this model organizes certain systematic observations that have been made regarding regularities in the temporal evolution of the color classification systems of the world's languages.
 Aspects of the Neurophysiology of Color Perception It is widely known that the retina contains three kinds of color receptors, i.
e.
, cones.
 It is perhaps less generally known that at postretinal but still peripheral levels of neural processing, information regarding dominant wavelength, or hue, is recoded from this threechannel system into a fourchannel system, yielding the four fundamental hue sensations, blue, green, yellow, and red.
 In 1920 Ewald Hering (1968) postulated, on the basis of primarily introspective evidence, that such a system must exist.
 Hering noted further that subjectively there is no such thing as a mixture of green and red nor of blue and yellowtry to imagine what one could possibly mean by the locutions 'a reddish green' or 'a bluish yellow'.
 He therefore supposed that there must exist what he called two 'opponent processes' in the visual system, one red vs.
 green process and one yellow vs.
 blue process.
 At a given moment, each process has to be in exactly one of its named states; for example, at a certain time the redgreen process might be in the red state and the yellowblue process in the yellow state: this pairing of states would give rise to the sensation of orange.
 If one admits continuity to the model by allowing each of the four opponent states to operate at varying strengths, the relative strengths of the two states operative at a given moment will determine the precise shade that is subjectively experienced.
 In our example, the relative strengths of the red and yellow states will determine whether a reddish orange, a yellowish orange, or a relatively balanced or pure orange is experienced.
 Despite the superiority of the Hering model over its competitors in explaining these and many other aspects of the subjective experience of color, it never gained general acceptance until Russell De Valois and his associates, as recently as the late 1960s, isolated the anatomical structures that accomplish the opponentprocess function and monitored this function in the living organism.
 After a series of preliminary experiments, which established that the visual system of the macaque monkey is like man's in all relevant respects, De Valois and his coworkers inserted microelectrodes into individual cells in the Lateral Geniculate Nucleii of live macaques and recorded the rates of firing of these cells while the animals' eyes were exposed to light of systematically varying wavelengths and intensities.
 It was found that L6N cells could be thus classified into six types, two of which were primarily sensitive to overall luminosity or brightness, and four of which were primarily sensitive to dominant wavelength or hue.
 The latter four types constitute the opponent process system.
 Each of these opponent cells has a spontaneous or basal rate of firing (or about 6 spikes per second): this rate increases or decreases depending on the wavelength of stimulating light according to the four patterns shown in Figure 1.
 Inspection of Figure 1 reveals that types of cell A and C form a pair in having the same crossover point between advanced and retarded rate of firing at about 605nm and also in having mirror image maxima and minima of firing rate at about 540nm and 640 nm.
 Cells of types A and C together constitute Hering's postulated redgreen process: considering all cells of types A and C at once, we may take the sum of the absolute deviations from the basal rate of firing in the long wavelength region, that is above the crossover point, as signaling the strength of the red response.
 Similarly, the total absolute deviation from the basal firing rate below the crossover point represents the strength of the green response.
 In analogous fashion the type B and D cells together constitute the yellowblue opponent process: the sum of absolute deviations above the crossover point is the total amount of yellow information or equivalently the strength of the yellow response, while below the crossover point the sum of absolute deviations represents the total blue response.
 Note that in a given stimulus condition, each opponent process must be in either one state or the other depending whether the wavelength of the stimulus is above or below the crossover point for that pair of types of cells.
 At a given wavelength there are thus two families of possibilities.
 (1) If the visible wavelength is at one of the crossover points, then one of the opponent systems is inert, e.
g.
 at about 605nm the macaque's redgreen system is quiescent; at this point all hue information is carried by the yellowblue channel, which is in the yellow (longer wavelength) state; this is called the yellow unique hue point; all the organism sees at this wavelength is pure yellow.
 The blue, green, and red unique hue points are defined in the same way.
 (2) If the stimulus wavelength is not at a unique hue point, then exactly two of the four fundamental hue states are operative and the relative strengths of these two states determine the precise shade of perceived hue; for example in the region 61 It r if "* 5 .
 ! • t •t, 11• • CClLL) 1 c .
.
 •.
 ̂^ io r.
 1' IC •< ,„ ,<,.
.
, it ,„ *»v(i£«.
:ri™.
̂ .
 .
r!i.
, •GRCELLS ! .
 t 1 '\\ i' "T •: *: K yŷ  »o ao K ie ̂ g tc •• *c io ,o.
 M o 5" I •,.
 t»BCELLS S 0.
 .
 I i M i '• ' 1 1 1 i • FiCLRf i.
Source De Valois ct al l')56 97273.
 Figs 912).
 Note Horizonul doited lines indicaic mean hnsal response rate for each cell type.
 between the yellow and green unique hue points the green state of the redgreen system and the yellow state of the yellowblue system are operative; the relative strengths of these response states determine whether a yellowish green, a greenish yellow, or a perfectly balanced chartreuse or lime is perceived.
 One may, in sum, model this system as having quantitative outputs in four channels, RED, YELLOW, GREEN, BLUE, where at a given instant there are nonzero outputs in either (1) a single channel or (2) two adjacent channels (considering red and blue as also adjacent).
 From psychophysical data Wooten (1970) has estimated the curves for humans comparable to those of rigure 1.
 Using these curves (not shown here) it is a straightforward matter to calculate for each channel of fundamental hue response (RED, YELLOW, GREEN, BLUE) the proportion of total hue response in that channel for each wavelength of visible light.
 Curves representing these calculations are shown in Figure 2.
 Being proportions, these functions necessarily have ordinates varying from zero to unity across the spectrum.
 It is therefore natural to interpret them as fuzzy sets, which interpretation is reflected by the ordinate of Figure 2 being labelled "Degree of Membershio".
 So far we have talked only about types of neural cells, their rates of firing, and certain functions composed of the firing rates of different classes of cells, but we have said nothing about the meanings of any words in natural languages.
 We are now prepared to make the initial connection: the curves labelled BLUE, GREEN, YELLOW, and RED in Figure 2 represent at one and the same time (1) the outputs of the fundamental hueresponse categories as defined in terms of proportional output in the individual hue channel of the opponent process system, and also (2) the meanings of the ordinary English words blue, green, yellow, and red, along with their exact translations into many languages.
 Similarly, nonopponent fundamental response channels BLACK and WHITE, corresponding to the English words black and white (and their translations in many other languages), are defined by the two classes of brightnesssensitive cells discovered by De Valois and his associates, and these categories also may be modeled as fuzzy sets.
 The Semantics of Color Words We have seen that six English color words (and their translations into other languages that have exact translations of these words) c»n be given r E 500 550 600 iJAVELENC •'•J NM FlOLRt %.
 62 neurophysiological definitions.
 For these six semantic categories, we have achieved a considerable rapprochement of semantics and perception.
 What can we say now about the perceptual basis of other color words in English and in other languages? In this investigation we will restrict our attention to what have come to be called 'basic' color words.
 In any language the basic color words form a natural set, and it is the comparison of the sets of basic color words across languages that has been found most fruitful in the crosslinguistic investigation of this semantic domain.
 In every language there is a small set of semantically simple words such that any color can be named with a member from this set.
 Members of this set are called the basic color words or basic color terms of the language.
 Several languages are known in which there are just two basic color terms.
 English has eleven; in addition to the six already discussed, which name the fundamental neural response categories, there are also brown, purple, pink, orange and grey.
 For many speakers of Russian, there are twelve basic color terms; Russian has a basic color term specifically for light blue, goluboy, along with the term for darker blue, sinyiy.
 For a long time it was believed by linguists and anthropologists that there were no constraints on the way the basic color terms of a language might divide the perceptual domain of color and hence no tendency for color words to be translatable across unrelated languages.
 Another way this idea was put was the claim that perception has no influence over colornaming in a language beyond setting the bounds of the visible spectrum.
 Thus in what was probably the most widely accepted linguistics textbook of the 1950s, H.
 A.
 Gleason said, "There is a continuous gradation of color from one end of the spectrum to the other.
 Yet an American describing it will list the hues as red, orange, yellow, green, blue, purpleor something of the kind.
 There is nothing inherent either in the spectrum or the human perception of it which would compel its division in this way" (1961:4).
 We now know that this is wrong and that all the basic color terms in all languages are based on the six fundamental response categories: the four of the opponent (i.
e.
 hue) system and the two nonopponent (i.
e.
 brightness) categories.
 We have already noted that each of these six categories has a structure that invites its interpretation as a fuzzy set.
 There is strong additional motivation for the fuzzy set interpretation, namely that all the other basic color categories, either in English or in any of the other languages that have been investigated, may be defined in terms of simple Boolean functions of these fuzzy sets.
 For example, in many languages of the world, including the majority of Native American languages, there is a single word that is used wherever an English speaker would use either the word green or the word blue.
 There is considerable experimental evidence indicating that this widespread basic color category (let us call it 'grue') is in fact the fuzzy union of the fundamental neural response categories GREEN and BLUE.
 For example, it has been found in a large number of languages that subjects asked to pick out from an array of color stimuli the best example of their category grue will not select something intermediate between green and blue such as we might call turquoise or aqua; rather, they will select either a focal green or a focal blue.
 Since the union of two fuzzy sets is defined as the maximum of the individual characteristic functions, this pretheoretically surprising, but empirically robust, finding is predicted by the definition of the category 'grue' as the fuzzy union of GREEN and BLUE.
 Berlin and Kay (1969) surveyed the basic color lexicons of ninetyeight languages and reported strong constraints on the semantics of basic color term systems.
 They also postulated a narrowly constrained evolutionary sequence through which basic color lexicons must pass as they add terms over time.
 That sequence, as reformulated by Kay and McDaniel (1978) about a decade later on the basis of a great deal of work by many investigators in the interim, is summarized in Figure 3.
 A language with only two basic color terms has one which is the fuzzy union,'WHITE or RED or YELLOW*, and one which is the fuzzy union,'BLACK or GREEN or blue'; these are conveniently glossed as 'lightwarm' and 'darkcool', respectively.
 When a language adds a third term, it does so by splitting the 'lightwarm' term into a'WHITE'term and a*RED or YELLOW'(i.
e.
 'warm') term.
 At the next stage of development, either the'darkcool'term splits into 'BLACK' and 'GREEN or BLUE', that is 'cooT, or the warm term splits into 'RED' and 'YELLOW' terms (see Stages Ilia and Illb in Figure 3 ) .
 At Stage IV, whatever possibility didn't occur at Stage III now occurs, so the language now has basic terms for the fuzzy categories 'WHITE', 'BLACK', 'RED', 'YELLOW', and 'GREEN or BLUE' (i.
e.
 'grue').
 At Stage V, the'grue'category is dissolved into its fundamental neural response components 'GREEN' and 'BLUE', and there is now one basic color term for each fundamental neural response category.
 Up to here in the sequence, we have been considering two types of basic color categories, those that consist in unions of fundamental neural response categories and those that consist in the fundamental neural response categories themselves.
 Beyond evolutionary Stage V, basic color categories of a new kind are formed on the basis of the intersections of the fundamental categories.
 More precisely each of W or R or Y Bk or G or Bu w R p r Y Bk or G or Bu .
 / rw 1 R or V G or Bu Lsk J ~̂ ^̂  ^ w R Y L Bk or G or Ĥ i J # ' W R V n „ Bk r Bu rw" R Y G Bu Bk Stages Ula Illb IV W R Y G Bu Bk Y + Bk(Brownl VI w R Y G Bu Bk V + Bk (Brown) R + W (Pink) R + l)u (Purpie) R + Y (Orange) ;B + W(Grey) VII Fk.
irf .
1 63 these later combinations of the fundamental categories consists in twice the fuzzy intersection of its constituent categories.
 For example, the fuzzy set orange is twice the intersection (minimum) of the fuzzy sets RED and YELLOW.
2 It is not possible in the time available to discuss the empirical motivation for the formulation of these intersectional categories in terms of precisely twice the intersection of the constituent fuzzy categories (see Kay and McDaniel 1978:631635; Mervis and Roth 1981).
 But the main points of the story so far should now be clear.
 Empirical semantic researches have revealed that, so far as we can tell at present, all the basic color categories of the languages of the world are based on the six fundamental neural response categories, whose structures are determined by the firing patterns of LGN (and other) cells in the visual pathway.
 Languages with fewer than six basic color terms have terms that encode categories composed of fuzzy unions of the fundamental categories.
 Languages that encode more basic categories than the six perceptually fundamental ones, encode categories based on the fuzzy intersections of the fundamental ones.
 Furthermore, there appear to be quite narrow constraints on which of the logically possible Boolean combinations of the six fundamental response categories actually occur in the world's languages.
 For example, of the fiftyseven possible categories that might be formed by taking fuzzy unions of the six neurologically fundamental categories, only the four we have discussed ('lightwarm', 'warm', 'darkcool', and 'cool'i.
e.
 'grue') occur in actual languages.
 Little is known by way of explanation of this fact, though it is perhaps worth recalling that Hering designated the colors white, red and yellow collectively as inherently arousing, and the colors black, green and blue as inherently nonarousing.
 Even more striking as an empirical generalization crying for theoretical explanation is the evolutionary sequence depicted in Figure 3.
 Why should the color lexicons of the world sort into just the handful of types permitted by this sequence and, above all, why should the temporal evolution of color terminology systems follow this particular, narrowly restricted course? Answers to these questions, as they are found, will deepen our understanding of the relation of perception and linguistic meaning in the domain of color.
 Notes 1.
 This talk is, in effect, a highly compressed summary of Kay and McDaniel (1978), and the hearer or reader interested in pursuing the subject should consult that paper and the references cited there.
 McDaniel (1972) was the first to propose a perceptual explanation for the Berlin and Kay (1969) findings regarding semantic universals in terms of the opponent process model of color vision.
 Figures 1, 2, and 3 accompanying this text are respectively Figures 4, 6, and 13 of Kay and McDaniel.
 2.
 In Figure 3, the '+' sign denotes the binary operation 'twice the fuzzy intersection'.
 References Berlin, B.
, and Paul Kay.
 1969.
 Basic color terms: their universality and evolution.
 Berkeley & Los Angeles: University of California Press.
 De Valois, R.
 L.
; I.
 Abramov; and G.
 H.
 Jacobs.
 1966.
 Analysis of response patterns of LGN cells.
 Journal of the Optical Society of America 56.
96677.
 , and G.
 H.
 Jacobs.
 1968.
 vision.
 Science 162.
53340.
 Primate color Gleason, H.
 A.
 1961.
 linguistics.
 New Winston.
 An introduction to descriptive York: Holt, Rinehart and Hering, Ewald.
 1920.
 Grundzuge der Lehre vom Lichtsinn.
 Berlin: Springer.
 [English version: Outlines of a theory of the light sense.
 Translated by L.
 M.
 Hurvich & D.
 Jameson.
 Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1964.
] Kay, Paul, and Chad K.
 McDaniel.
 1978.
 The linguistic significance of the meanings of basic color terms.
 Language 54:610646.
 Mervis, C.
 B.
, and E.
 M.
 Roth.
 1981.
 The internal structure of basic and nonbasic color categories.
 Language 57:383405.
 Wooten, B.
 R.
 1970.
 The effects of simultaneous and successive chromatic constraint on spectral hue.
 Doctoral dissertation, Brown University.
 64 Stnictiir"! and riinclion in Ihc early procrssinc of lisual iiironnalion Shimon Ullman llic Anificical liilclligcncc l^ibnralory Mas'^chtisciis Jnslltutc of Technology I.
 Iiilroducllon A central notion in contemporary cognitive science is thai mental pi(x:c";<;cs involve computations defined over internal representations.
 This general view suggests a distinction between the study of the representation and computations pciformed by our cognitive systems on tlie one hand, and tlic physical braui mechanisms supporting tliesc comptnations on the other.
 I he two studies proceed along different paths, and neither is completely reducible to Uie other.
 It is the hope of cognitive Science, however.
 Uiat the studies of function and mechanism can coiii|)lcnicnt each other, and ihat Uicorics c m be developed for various cognitive subsystems that will describe and explain tlieir computational aspects, their underlying mech.
inisms, and Uic interactions between Ihc two.
 In this paper I shall dcsciibe some attempts to combine the study of brain mech.
inisins with conipui.
itional considerations in llic first stapes of visual information processing.
 This work combines the conIrilnitiors of many individuals, most notably the late David Marr, and a group of people w h o were fonuiiate to work with him, primarily at M.
I.
 I "s Artificial Inielligence l.
iboiaiory and l\\chology IX'parlment.
 I.
 lU'prisciilini; inliiisil) chances In iniaKCS Ihc fii^t ciMiipMlalion.
ll incihlciii ill.
it ariv.
s in Ihc early piocessing of visual inli'iin.
ilion is the initi.
il niL.
iiii/.
iiion .
md rcprcsoiil uiiin of the input KLislcted b\ Ihc r\es.
 \i tlio pliotouLcpini', lc\cl.
 ihc input 111 llu Msiial s\sicin consists of o,ci .
' 11) iiiilliiui liiilit iniiu.
ilv iiir.
isiircniriits (lepi .
icic.
l In ovrr IJII iiiillinM ciiiics ami imls in c.
ich c\,' I I his IS .
III iiiiwklilv luce .
mil iiiiiriaiiii ,1 scl i;f iiiM'.
imnK'iils.
 \\ i.
 can therefore expect the visual system to construct a more economical representation of the input, that will make explicit the relevant information for lalci priKcssing stages.
 A reasonable candidate for the task is a representation that can be roughly described .
is an edge represcniation of Ihc im.
age.
 llic idea is to make explicit the locations in iJie image where light intensity changes sharply from one level to anothci.
 Hie motivations for this type of a repiescm.
ilion are (i) it will achieve a more concise description of the image than liie original array of intensity values , and (ii) sharp changes in light intensity values usually have a physical signiricancc.
 Iliey are often associated, for example, wiili object boundaries, markings on objects' surfaces, and so forth A n edge representation is Uieieforc useful in making the transition from the domain of light intensities in die image to analy?ing die physical structure of die visible environment O n e general observation often raised in suppoit of the edge representation approach is that many objects are recognisable from a sketch of their edges anrt contours alone, although in terms of the underlying light intensity distributions, llie sketch and the original image arc markedly dilTerenl.
 T h e representation of localized intensity changes is not tlie only approach Dial has been proposed for Ihc first stnges of analyzing visual information.
 O n e popular alternative is tlie Kourier analysis approach tliat received wide attention in die psychophysical literature following Campbell and Rohson's (19681 discovery of spatial frequency tuned channels in die visual system.
 I he approach presented here is in a sense a combination of the frequency channels and tlic edge detection approaches, but il is concerned primarily with die detection of intensity changes.
 A large variety of techniques have been proposed in die past (primalily within die ciH'incering field of iniagc processing) for Ihc detection ol inleiisil) cli.
m.
Kcs in images.
 A iii.
ijor piobloin lliat has been (liscmcicd in the ciiiiise of ilc\clo|iinp these lecliiii(|iios.
 is ihat sicnifii.
iiil iiilcnsii) cIi,iii(.
hs in .
in iiu.
it'C can occur at a v.
iiieiy of scales.
 Siiiiio cli.
iiipcs aie ci.
idual and smniiili: they c m .
iKu he ilcsciihcd in lrct|iicnc\ diini.
iin triiiiuinloin a low fiet|iK'iicv lIliii:''".
.
 (>|Iicis are high frequency and sharply hKali'ed changes.
 T o capture all of die significant intensity changes, it is possible to examine tlie image nt a number of different resolutions, or scales.
 A low lesolution "copy" will serve for capturing die gradual, gross changes, a high resolution "copy" for the fine details, ligure 1 shows an example of what it means for the same image to be examined at three different resolutions.
 T h e resolution decreases from la to Ic.
 It can be seen that in die lower resolution copies fine details are progressively blurred.
 Ihc low resolution copy can be obtained by a puKCSs called gaussian filtering (and this filtering is in a sense optimal, see Marr & llildiedi 1980).
 This simply means that at every point a local average is taken of die intensity values, using a gaussian weighting function.
 The resolution of the resulting copy is controlled by the sise of tJie gaussian.
 A larger giiassian averages die intensity values over a wider neighborhood, and hence is less sensitive to fine details.
 Hie gaussian smoothing is also called in mathematical terms die convolution of the image with a gaussian filter, denoted by C * I (where / is the image, G is die gaussian smoothing function).
 As a result of the first operation we have a number of "copies" of the original im.
ige, at a number of different resolutions, as detcnnined by the si/cs of the gaussian fillets (figure 2).
 Mie next step is to isolate the sharp intensity changes in each copy.
 W e shall consider this problem first in the context of onedimensional signals.
 In diis case, die image / is a function of a single variable, denoted by i.
 A sharp change in the signal /(i) can be defined as a peak in its first derivative, since die derivative, by definition, measures die signal's slope.
 I'rom clcinentiiiy calculus, peaks in the first derivative can also he located by 7cro<rossings of the second derivative (i.
e.
 places where die second dcrivaiive changes sign).
 Mathematically the two criteria are equivalent but the second characteri/alion has certain advantages when twodiiiiciisiiin.
il signals arc concerned |Marr & llildieth I98()|.
 65 http://ciMiipMlalion.
llIn siiiiiniar), Ihc iDi.
ili/.
iinm ofshnrp ch;inpi'; is dhiiiincil by perriiiMiInt:: ,;';k.
v) (!) Mk /cm unssinr' iii the oiilpiit »ill iiuln.
iH' ilic Icn.
ilicms dl sh.
iip intensity changes in the iinngc nt tlic scnic determined by llic gaiissian.
 Ihis nie.
ins that the image / is first passed Ihrough a gaiissian sitioolliing finiclion G, and iJicn a second derivative of the result is taken, lite two operations of scaling and diffeientialion he combined in a convenient manner, llic combination is based on a mathcinallcal identity that slates ih.
it ihc oider ofdilTctcnliation and convohilion can be cli.
in.
ccd without alTccting the result In ni.
ithematical notation; £ .
 ( ^ ^ • 0 = ( £ , « ) • / (2) The imphcation is tJial the two opeiations can he collapsed into a single one: simply filter the image not through a gaussian function, but through ll];G (the second derivatnc of a gaussian).
 Ihis function is shown in figure li (.
lb shows its fourler tiaiisform).
 llic analogue in two dimensions would he a similar hut circularly svinmetric fimction which has the appcar.
nice of a "nicxican hat" Mathematically, in Ihc twoihmensional cise the filter is V ' G .
 where V ^ is tJic laplaii.
in and G a twodiuiensiimal g.
iussian function.
 The scheme is n o w stiaightforward: the rcpicsentation of intensity changes is dhiaincd from the /crocrossing in the result of passing the image through filters that have the shape of V ' C .
 Ibose «lio have some familiarity with Ihc physiology of die visual system would readily iccogni/e Ihc shape of these filters as corresponding to ilie shape of retin.
il ganglion receptive fields.
 In other words.
 Uie retinal structure can be viewed as approvim.
iiing the convolution of the image with the V ' G filicis.
 (Itir more detail sec Marr & llildieth 1980.
 Marrct Ullin.
ni 1980.
 ligure 4 shows ev.
iniplcs of images following ihis rclin.
il operation, and the lesulting /ciocrossinps representations (generated by I lien llildieth).
 Ihc fiisi row shows two iniaees piioi to the lillcring stage.
 I he sctond low shows the images lillcrcd Ihiough die lelinal operation.
 It .
iiivcs MPiiic idc.
i of the li'ini of the iiii.
iiie .
is it Ii.
imIs up the opiic ner\e Iniii the c>e.
 Ma .
iii iiiuinudi ilc si.
iiiuii calKil llie l(iN.
 to Ihc visual loiiex in aie.
i I ' o^ the hrain I lie ihml rov illusii.
iU's ihe icsulline /rii> iiossiir iipi.
i ul.
ilioiis I iriu.
 5 sln.
ws .
iii lui I'e lof .
i sculpture h> Henry Moore) and its /cro<rossiiig icpresc'niation at three difTereni resolutions.
 Hcforc turning to the physiological aspects of the ^crocrossing representations, it will be of inleiest to note that 7erocrossings in bandp.
iss fillers are known to he, in a sense, "rich in information" II.
 I ogan of the Hell l,aboi,itories has shown that a oncdiinensional sigii.
il with a bandv,idth of less dian one octave c.
in be completely reconstructed (up to an overall mulnplicalivc consi.
uii) from its /crocrossings alone, provided that some simple conditions ,ire mil |l ogan 1977|, It is not clear, however, whether die dieorcm can he extended to two dimensions, and under what conditions die oneiictavc restriction can be relaxed (this problem arises since the filters in Uic h u m a n visii.
il system are probably more Uian an octave wide).
 If appropriate extensions along these lines can be made, it would imply that the 7Crocrosslngs provide not only a convenient representation that captures the significant aspects of the image, but also a complete one.
 Ilial is, no essential inlonnation is lost by discarding tJie image and analyzing the ?cri)crossing representation alone.
 (See Marr, I'oggin & Ullman 1979.
 for fill thcr discussion of this issue.
) .
1 I lie liioloKical detection of zerocrossings I he analysis so far leads to the general suggestion that fiillowing die retinal operation Ihe nexl step is to locale and lepreseiit a m a p ofUic zerocrossings In the oulput.
 If this siiggeslion is correct, then a main fiinclion of die primary visual cortex should be die construction of the zerinrossings rcpicsentation.
 I shall next turn to consider hriefiy how zerocrossings mav be detected by the mechanisms ofihe visual cortex.
 I he fibers of the optic nerve roming from the eye to the brain carry Ihc image filtered Ihroiigli Ihe V V; rcceplive fields (lliis is, of course, a ciimpul.
iiioDal icleali/.
ilioii).
 This luiir.
il im.
ipe is in lad carried by iinit< ol two coinplemcni.
ii\ t>pes, called oncciilci ,iiiil ollienler iinils.
 Ihc oHniiici uiiils.
ue siiiipiv "iineiliil iiK\ii.
,iii h.
ils" vsiili pug.
pliieceiilci ,iikI iHiMinc siiirouiul lot us iKrv cdiMcli'i liic ii'iiii.
il diiipiil ill Ihc Mciiiih dl an cili'c, lit'iuc l<.
\ drpitls ,i sic|i edge, .
iiiil fih is ilic rcsiili dl p issiiir.
 fii lliidiM'h icliii.
illd.
c III cplivc lirldv I Ins dul|;iil toiil.
iiii' both negative and positive values.
 In contrast, the optic nerve carries no negative values; die positive part of the signal is carried by the oncenter units, and die negative part by the offceiucr ones.
 I his means dial within die system die zerocrossing itself is always flanked by two peaks of activity: of onccntei cells on one side, and olTcenler cells on die other.
 Ihe detection of a zerocrossing can easily be acconiplislied, dierefore.
 by a simple comhiiialion of the on and olTccnter units.
 W h e n two adjacent units, one offccnicr, the other oncenter, are active simultaneously, they indicate die existence of a zerocrossing ninning midway between them.
 Note diat a point of zero value is detected in this scheme by detecting peaks of activity radier than zero activity.
 The basic zerocrossing detector is shown in figure 7a, It is composed of die two siihunils (on and offcenter) combined with an "and" operation.
 Ibis means that the two units are required to be active simultiincously to produce a response.
 Ihe unit can be made oriented by combining a number of such detectors lying in a row (figure 7b).
 Such an oriented unit will exhibit many of die properties of cortical simple cells ("edge detectors") originally discovered by iliibel & VVicsel in die visual cortex of die cat | 1 % 3 | and monkey (19fi8|.
 It will still l.
ick, however, one fundamental property; cells in die visual cortex are also oden selective for direction of motion.
 They respond well when dieir preferred stimulus moves in one direction, but little or not at all when it moves in die opposite direction.
 4.
 Vrldini; (ilrcitiiinal selecliiity With the addition of one siihunit it is possible to make the b.
isic zerocrossing dclector diicc tionally selective, and use it for Ihe incisure66 mcni of visual moliiin.
 lo sec bow.
 consider ag.
iin ihc zero crossing iiwcialcd uiih an inlcnsily edge (figure 6b).
 At Ihc /croiiossing itself ihc ciiirtiu \,iliic is.
 of course, zero.
 Ii c m be rc;idil.
\ seen from ilic flptiie Ibal il ihc piolilc m m moves lo the iiphl.
 Ihe i.
iliic al Ihis poijil will be iiicriMsiiip.
 II II iiiii\c lo ilio Irli.
 ibe \aliic mil be diLHMsiiip lt> sinipiv in̂ pitliiii; llic sii;n ol (lie leio|iiM.
il tliaii,i;i.
' il iIuk luie becomes p(ftvible lo dcli.
miinc (be iliKilioii of motion.
 Il is mil ililliiiill lo csliblisli lli.
il It IS liiKliii po' ihl' to niiMsnie Ibe spiiij ol million 111 Uic direction of Ibc unit by comparing llie slope of Ihc zerocrossing and Ibe rale of temporal clinngc.
 Ihc extra subunit should respond tlicrcforc to temporal changes.
 Ideally, it should behave like the time dciivalivcnfthcsigii.
il.
 i.
e.
 ,'/j(V'G).
 As it turns out.
 the population of retinal cells contain a natural candidate for this task.
 Ihcsc arc the so called Ylypc cells, originally discovered by rnrolhCupcll & Kobson (lOMil.
 Ihis is a relatively small siibpopiilaiion of cells that arc kiumn lo be "transient" I hat is.
 iJicy rcpond lo a sicacl.
v stimulus by a sluirt aiu1 brisk response when Ihc stimulus is turned on or o(T.
 I he ntlicr major populalion of retinal cells arc the sustained.
 Xtypc cells.
 Such a cell responds to a stationary siunuliis will) a sustained response tJiat usually conlinues as long as Uie stimulus is present Milhin its rcccpti\c licld.
 diir schematic model of die simplest directionally selective units is therefore constniclcd fiom three types of subunits.
 As before, it has a row of oncenter cells, and a row of oircentcr cells, both of the sustaincil Ijpc.
 In addilion.
 il has ,iii input from at least one transient Y lype unit (figure 7i).
 A more detailed discussion of this general scheme can be found in (Man & Ullnian 1981).
 Ihis general vhcme for zcrotrossing and motion detection w:i dinon prim,inly by computalion.
il consider.
ilions.
 I'liysiologically, al Ihoiigli \t)pe units were often <lcsciil)ed as transient, it was not cica wlicther ihey can also be dcscfihcd .
is at least approximating die re quired time deru.
iiivc opcr.
ilion.
 W e Ibereforecoinpaied the response icqiiiicil hy the ciiiii|iui.
ilion,il sihciiic with pluvioKignal response (lakcii finni Rodirck î  Stone.
 lOfA.
 Dicher & S.
iiulcrson 197.
V sei Mill iV; Ullinan l')Sl lor del.
ills) S o me uimp.
insims,ire shown in figiin u (for \ cells) and 9(foi V lcHs).
 I Ik top row in figiiie N is Ibe coinolu lion iif \.
irimis profiles (edge, thin h.
ii, wide b.
ir) wiih V ' G .
 O n icniei colls ,iu' cv|Hxled to cari\ the po'.
iliM.
' |i,iil of these profiles, anc oil (cni'i the ncr.
iliie |Viit In the iiixl ino runs the posime put i.
l the si;;ii.
il iscomp.
iud with reLonliiii's fioiii on ceiilei cells, .
ind in Ihc List lo'As the 111 e.
iiuc put is l o m p m d with lerordinrs liniii oil (.
enlei I ills '.
111111,11 ioiM|i.
iii.
ons .
lie ̂  111'I'll III liiiu ') In I'M , ii die iniiipol.
itional model, based on •',{(•*I) '"̂  physiological recordings.
 It can be seen that even in the cases where the profiles .
ne r.
ither complicated, die general agreement is good.
 linallv in Ihis section, figure Id shows an example of applying the motion deteclioii scheme described above Ui a mo\ing random texture.
 I igurcs Ida and h shovv a pair ori.
iiidoin d m patterns, A central square ill ID.
i is sliilli'd ill lOli sliplitl) to die right, while the h.
itkgrounds of die two figures arc uncorrclaled W h e n these figures arc presented lo h u m a n observers in a rapid ailcrnadon.
 the central square is imniedalcly perceived to mov e h,ick and forlh against a background of uncorrclaled molion Figure 10c shows iJic zerocrossings representation of lOa.
 ligure lOd is the result of die molion analysis of the zerocrossing (Ihe light dots indicate die direction of motion of die z.
crocrossings).
 In figure 10c tlic light dots where removed from tlic area where coherent motion (to tlic right) was found.
 Ilic motion assignment was correct, with die exception of a few isolated points, and as a result the moving square was detected.
 1 have sketched above some aspects of an evolving dicory of early visual information processing.
 Ihe main goal has been not to present a comprehensive review of the theory, but to illustrate an alienipt aimed at combining die study of structure and function in the early stages of visual perception.
 M.
ijor paits of the Iheoiy were consequcndy left out of Ihe discussion, most notably, die use of Ibc early iepresent;iti(ms in sicrcn \isi(iii [M.
irr & I'ocgiii 1979.
 Crimson 19S1).
 l'in.
illy.
 1 would like to end with two hiief cautionary notes.
 Ihc first has to do with Ihc specific pmhlciii of aii.
dy/ing image contours.
 l.
vcn if Ibe zerocrossing .
in.
iljsis is .
ilong the right track.
 i| provides only the first slaccs in the ,inal>sis of cdgts .
ind liii.
ige ciiiiloiiis ligure 11 illiisiiates examples ofcontuurs ih.
it are e isily peicoived but cannol be c.
iplured by any simple iiit',iisit\based .
iimKsis of the im.
ige.
 In (igiiic H a all Ihe lines In .
ilciiij; Ilic IS deii.
 di.
i.
fon.
ils Ihe lioiizoiil.
il .
iiid \eitic.
i! Iioinid.
'irics whiih .
iic .
ipp.
iieiil in Ihe im.
ige .
ire |iioducetl not b\ .
thiiipt intensiis cli.
tiirr.
.
 biii by uiLiiii '.
'inupi'u; pioccssos.
 lî 'iiie 111) is .
111 es.
niiplc of so i tll.
d "(ii!'iiili\< < iitiloni'.
".
 I hc\ do not exist in the im.
age.
 and cannol he detected by simple intensitybased operations.
 These example senes to illustrate that e\cn a seemingly simple and elementary task such .
is die detection of image contours, requires in fact complex processing that is still far from being complelely understood.
 Ilic second and more general comiiieiit h.
is to do with llic iiitcgraliim of theories ol riinclion and struclure in more complex systems, llic examples I have oullincd come from a system lh.
it is relatively simple and easy lo explore.
 Us anatimiical structure is orderly, the input lo the system is relatively easy to control and manipulate expeiimenlally, and m u c h is known about its physiology.
 I'ven under Uicse favorable conditions, the integration orsliucture and function proves lo be exceedingly difiicult.
 What is die hope.
 then, for achieving tompiehensive theories of structure and function for higher, more complicaicd.
 cognitive systems? •flic task is certainly fiuniid.
ible.
 hut it is piobablv worthy of exploration at least in certain instancs.
 since it appears unlikely dial the sitiicture tif complex systems t.
in he understood without some guidelines supplied b> computational theories.
 It has to he admitted.
 however, that given the dilTiculties of die task il is unclear whether coherent and detailed liieoiics combining stiiicturc and fuiictlnn can be achieved al present beyond Ihe simplest congnilive systems.
 AekiMiMleilgnunt: I wish to thank I llildicth and K, Stevens for their invalu.
ililc help.
 67 file:///aliichttp://dciivalivcnfthcsigii.
ilhttp://ih.
ithttp://lioiizoiil.
ilfile:///eitic.
ihttp://lh.
itFig.
 1 The same image al three clirTcrciit resolutions.
 Campbell.
 K\V.
 & Kobsnn, J.
O.
 Application of Kouricr analysis to the visibility of gratings.
/ l'hy5iol.
(l.
(mJon) 107.
 551556.
 Drehcr, I).
 & Sanderson, K.
J, 1973 Receptive field analysis: responses to moving visual contours by single lateral geniculate neurons in the cat.
 7, I'hysiol.
 I ami.
 231 95118.
 lnrothCugcll, C.
 & Kobsnn, J.
 D.
 1966 The contrast sensitivity of retinal ganglion cells of the cat.
 J.
 /'Iiysiul.
 (I.
oiid) 187, 517522.
 Crimson, W.
l I.
.
 1981 A computer implementation of a llieory of human stereo vision.
 I'liil.
 Trans.
 Ray.
 .
Sue.
 li.
 292 (I05H).
 217253.
 I lubel, 1 ).
H.
 & Wicsel.
 V.
N.
 1962 Receptive fields, binocular interaction, and functional architecture in the cat's visual cortex.
 / /V/iw,)/.
 Inmloii.
 160.
 106154.
 Ilubcl, 1)11.
 & Wiesel, I.
N.
 1968 Receptive fields and functional architecture of monkey striate cortex, y.
 Physiol.
 London.
 195.
 215243.
 Kogan, 11.
1.
 1977 Inform,ition in the /crocrossings of bandpass signals.
 flf//,S>s Tali.
.
I.
.
 56.
 487510.
 Marr, I).
 & I'oggio.
 I 1979 A compuuilional tlieory of hum.
in stereo vision.
 Twc.
 Roy Sac.
 loud II 204, 301328.
 Marr, I).
 Poggio.
 I.
 & Ullniaii.
 S.
 1979 Randpass channels, zerocrossings, and early visu,il infi)rmaIion priKCSsing.
 / OpI.
 .
Soc.
 ,1m.
, 60(6).
 914916.
 Marr, I).
 & llildrcth.
 K.
 1980 theory of edge detection.
 I'roc.
 R.
 ,V<.
<.
 lond n.
 187217.
 Marr, I).
 & Ullnian.
 S.
 1981 Directional seleclivily and its use in early visu.
il processing.
 PnK.
 Roy.
 Sue.
 Ioml B.
 2// 151180.
 Rodicck, U.
 \V.
 & Stone.
 J.
 I%5 An.
ilysis of receptive fields of cat iclin.
il g.
inglion cells.
.
/ Nnnopliyshil.
 2S.
 833849.
 i'igurc 2.
 OifTcrcnt resolution copies of the original im.
ige are obtained by convolving the image with ganssian filters of diU'eicnt sizes.
 68 Tigurc 1 a.
 The shape of J'̂ 'iG.
 b.
 Its 1'miricr liansrorm.
 j e A >^ ^ j 0 ^ ^ ^ I J ^ r d i < ? X ' ^ t".
 I'igurc 4.
 l.
xamplcs of /crocrossing rcprescntnlions.
 I'irst row: the original linages.
 Second row: the images following the convolution with V ' G .
 niiril rwo: the rcsulling ?enn:rossings representations.
 69 Fig.
 5 /crocnwing representations of (lie s.
imc image at tlirce diflcrcnt resolutions.
 I a i I'igiMC ().
 A <;it'p C(lj;c hcfmc (.
1) ;ind .
iClci [he cfMunliiliiMo wilh (!ic rctin.
'il opcintDi {h).
 70 (•'igiirc 7 A schemalic di.
igr.
iin of ihc li,i<;ic /crotrossing dclcclor.
 a.
 Oiiccnici nnd oircciiicr iiriiK ;irc ANPcii logcthcr.
 b.
 A row of such siibiinils in.
ikes Ihc dclcctur orirnlationspocific.
 e.
 Willi the .
nddilicm o(n liiiic dcriv.
itivc suhiinil Ihc (I'ic !nr hccomc; dircclionnlly selective.
 EDGE THIN BAR WIDE BAR _ k _ J\  j L j L XCHANNEL 1 ipiirc S, A ' nnipiilscin hcmccii Ihc ccirnpiil.
iiKin.
il iiuhIcI ,iiu1 physiiilogic.
il icc(iidHip<,, rnriin .
iiul (ilf ccnlcr X c;,pc iiiirls.
 I nrdclaihscc texl 71 L r I m a o m > z z m > .
_s> T z •rs 1 cs > JO .
 I • I ' a) .
v.
i ? » ;.
'.
•.
, .
'.
.
 , ,r_' .
.
 ii • ' '",.
(,' '1.
,"'• 'i • ~ '.
II ,,=• •" • 3 .
 ' J.
.
V, •••• ,•.
 • ••I'  ' m m ^ , 72 C a ) C b l ^ e ^ % 0 I igiMC 11.
 Comdiirs thai caniidl he dcicclcd hy simple inlcnsily based (ipcralors.
 73 S Y M P O S I U M A F F E C T Affect, emotion, and other cognitive curiosities George Handler University of California, Dan Diego The lure of phenomenocentrism.
 During the past century  at least since Darwin, Marx and Freud  our concept of reality has undergone changes that have been particularly apparent in the cognitive sciences.
 A dominant symptom has been the sharp swing of attitudes toward the apparent and convincing reality of phenomenal experience.
 It is practically impossible not to be overwhelmed bv the immediacy of human experience.
 Philosophers have tended to accept its primacy through the ages and many cognitive scientists still do.
 We have overcome the perils of ethnocentrism and of anthropocentrism; we believe no longer that either our social values or humankind are the touchstones of social organization or the measure of animal behavior.
 But we are still phenomenocentric; we accept as basic the surface experiences that we seem to share with our fellow featherless bipeds.
 Phenomenocentrism has been abandoned in some corners of cognitive science; but many psychologists, philosophers and AI practitioners seem to hold stoutly to the dogna that common h'jman experience provides the basic building blocks of cognition.
 I want to argue that this kind of commitment to surface structure as the psychologicallv "real" prevents progress and, in particular, has barred us from any reasonable understanding of human emotion.
 Any satisfactory comprehension of the structures and processes that generate affect and emotion requires the postulatlon of deep structjre, a willingness to go "beyond phenomenology.
" It Is the case, of course, that the common experience our phenomenal world  does provide the major insights that have led us to determine the important problems and some of the answers abojt human cognition.
 Psychology has failed when it has Ignored these insights.
 But the importance of common experience, language and understanding In the context of discovery must not color the need to go beyond phenomenology and folk experience when we try to understand the processes, structures and mechanisms that determine, generate and construct that experience.
 There are two glaring examples of phenomenocentrism In the fields of affect and emotion.
 The first, popular through the ages and exemplified by Charles Darwin and his descendants, postulates the categories of emotion taken from the natural language as the fundamental building blocks of human (and lower) emotional life.
 It Is a position that searches for the effects of jnanalyzed emotions, posits a limited set of such fjindamental emotions, and even seeks their locus in various corners of the human brain.
 It has variously reified such nicely vague concepts as fear, love, anxiety, joy, lust, dread, and so forth, and so forth.
 The other position, beloved of poets and some social psychologists, posits the prlmacv and noncognitlve (i.
e.
, knowledge Independent) nature of affective experience.
 Its advocates assert that feelings and affects occur prior to the registration and/or experience of other aspects of human experience, and particular prior to "cognitive" events.
 Emotion and the categories of natural language.
 A concern that Is related to phenomenocentrism and, like It, a hangover from the '9th centarv is exemplified In the penchant to take seriously the Implicit claim that some natural language categories, define a Copyright 0 '98' George Mandler well bounded, precise set of phenomena.
 Elnotion is one of these categories.
 To ask "what is (an) emotion?"  as William James did and as some cognitive scientists still do  assumes that the vagueness and redundancy of natural language is suspendable.
 Categories like emotion (just as intelligence, justice, equity, learning, aggression, etc.
 etc.
) have an evolutionary history and current function that do not support the weight of explanatory systems.
 They are useful, and have developed, as communicative devices in natural discourse.
 The analyses of these functions is an important enterprise (usually engaged in by our philosophical brethren).
 However, they fall far short of definitional devices as a first step toward satisfactory explanatory! y and theoretical ends.
 At least one can say that to date attempts to develop satisfactory, exhaustive, and scientifically useful definitions (much less explanations) of "iWOTION" have failed.
 Again, having inveighed against natural language categories, I turn to them as a starting point.
 The categories of our common experience are, of course, collections of events (or objects) that do have a vague common core.
 That common core Is  as in the case of the phenomenal experiences an indispenslble starting point for serious investigation.
 In the case of affect and emotion, there are apparently two aspects that characterize the collection.
 Dictionaries tell us that emotions refer to "vehement, excited mental states," that they involve "agitation, disturbance of mind, feeling, passion.
" Affects are mental states that involve "desires, intentions," and "inward dispositions" and "intent.
" During its early history, and to some extent in its modern usage, the term "affect" also invoked the same kind of physical referent that the emotions do.
 What the common concepts of emotion and affect seem to have in common is a state of phvsi( ologi) cal excitation or arousal.
 What apparently differentiates the various affects or emotions are desires, intentions, and values.
 Looking for femotion's deep structure.
 If we now turn to the problem of arriving at a program of theory or research, we need to postulate a system that constructs or generates some subset of these emotional phenomena.
 I shall defend one version of such a theory, but the main thrust of mv argument is that some kind of theory (deep structure) needs to be developed that generates socalled emotional behavior and experience.
 Psychologists have variously emphasized the agitation/arousal dimension or the intention/value aspect.
 Most of the the papers at this symposium address the latter problem, i.
e.
, the specification of the cognitive structure of emotions.
 I shall outline a point of view which is equally concerned with the arousal and evaluative aspects of the generative system, though I do not go into the kinds of details that the cognitive components require, and that are exemplified by the other papers of the symposium.
 A point of view.
 My concern is specifically with the conscious experience of emotion.
 As a consequence, I have been concerned recently with the construction of conscious experience in general.
 There have been a n'umber of recent suggestions, notably by A.
J.
 Marcel (198'), that stress the constructive nature of consciousness, such that a particular conscious state Is seen as constructed out of two or more activated schemas that produce a phenomenal unity that apparently conforms to the Intentions of the individual and the reqjlrements of the task and situation.
 The constructive approach to consciousness Is ideally suited to accommodate the notion that conscious experience of emotion concatenates both evaluative 75 cognitions and autonomic arousal.
 Thus, the phenomenal emotional experience is not some additive result of arousal and evaluation, but rather the scheraas activated by arousal and evaluation are used in constructing the phenomenally unified emotional experience.
 Its intensity will indeed be related to the degree of arousal and its specific quality will depend on a complex evaluative cognitive event, but the two ingredients are experienced as a single emotion, just as eggs, milk, and sugar may be experienced as custard.
 This approach also accommodates the fact that there exist experiences of "cold" emotions, of evaluative cognitions without arousal, and of unemotional arousal, of autoncmic arousal without the cognitions that provide emotional qualities.
 The arousal component of emotional experience can be ascribed primarily to peripheral autonomic nervous system (ANS) activity.
 Whereas there is some evidence that what is most efficiently registered is some general level of ANS activity (heart rate, blood pressure, gastric motility etc), we also know that there are large individual differences in the patterning of the various autonomic indicators.
 It mav well be the case that registration of peripheral arousal will, in the individ'ual case, be governed by different patterns and may, in some cases, be driven by a single channel (such as heart rate activity).
 For the present, the sufficient and necessary conditions for the occurrence of autonomic arousal are not adequately known.
 To a large extent we still rely on lists of "elicitors" which are of varying degree of utility (e.
g.
, tissue injury, stress, surprise, threat, emergency reaction, etc.
 etc.
).
 I have suggested that the interruption of ongoing action, the discrepancy between expectation and evidence, and similar instances of incongruity between organisms' schemes and the evidence from the environment, are responsible for a large subset of the occurrences of ANS arousal.
 Such a hypothesis not only is consistent with the homeostatic view of the ANS, but also responds to adaptive, evolutionary functions of the autonomic system in general.
 Whenever an expectation is violated or a plan kept from being carried out (either in thoijght or action) an interruption (discrepancy) occurs which leads to ANS arousal.
 It is important to note that pleasant as well as unpleasant experiences are captured bv this approach 'unexpected, desirable events generate arousal just as unexpected, noxious events.
 What is the natare of evaluative cognitions? In the first place, I suggest that there are three so'orces of value that influence the quality of an emotional experience.
 Our evaluations may be based on innate, prewired values  such as the preference for certain temperature ranges, the avoidance of looming objects, the preference for sweet over bitter tastes; or our values may be culturally predicated  we are "told" what is edible, lovable, drinkable, without ever having had direct interactions with the objects in question that would direct our values; and finally we may make valuative judgments that are determined bv the structare of the valued event  or rather we base our jud^ent on some comparison between the event and some existing schema.
 It is the latter which I find most challenging; what are the structures that determine judgments of beauty, ugliness, preference or rejection, and which in turn determine emotions of joy and disgust, liking and disliking? There has been some reasonable amount of work done on such staples as anxiety, fear, and grief, but much analysis is still to come  some of it presented at this symposium.
 I 76 have taken one step in that direction in trying to show how one of the more primitive evaluative judgment, that of preference arising out of the sense of familiarity, is related to the oongruity between expectations (schemas) and evidence in the world.
 In general, though, I would argue that much of the valuative cognitions that contribute to emotional quality deal with the internal structure of events rather than with the presence or absence of features or attributes.
 Thus, the sense of loss that leads to grief deals with relationships and not with the specific characteristics of the lost person.
 Similarly beauty and ugliness deal with structural relationships, as do the cognitions that underlie jealousy and even fear.
 That practically canonic emotion anxiety  apparently has a cognitive basis in the perceived absence of structure, not in any definable feature of the anxiety arousing situations.
 Emotion and cognitive science.
 In contrast to certain speculations to the contrary (e.
g.
, Zajonc, 1980), these arguments suggest that evaluative cognitions (preferences, likings, aversions etc.
) are relatively complex cognitive events, certainly involving more processing than simple definitional or featural judgments.
 We have recently collected some data that support this argument; simple impressionistic judgments of liking (the simplest evaluative judgment) are slower than simple categorical jud^nents, with the effect becoming rather large for familiar objects.
 Thus it takes longer to process the information needed for simple val'uation than for simple categorization, exactly what we would expect if the former involves processing of internal structural relationships, while categorization may proceed on more simple presence/absence judgments about features or attrib utes.
 The argument that affect or emotion is prior to or independent of cognitions frequently appeals to the phenomenal evidence that we are often conscious of valuations before we are aware of the details of the event that is being valued.
 Even if this particular kind of phenomenocentric assertion is confirmed by some future analyses, it does not say anything about cognition and affect, but it does address the nature of consciousness and the kinds of conscious constructions involved in affect and in other kinds of experiences.
 That analysis is beyond the scope of this presentation.
 Cognitive scientists have, often for good reason, been accused of being scientific imperialists.
 The old division of the world into cognition, conation, and will has been destroyed by raiding parties that have penetrated deep into (undefended) territory previously considered noncognitive.
 To the extent that such aggression has been justified, it has been based only in part on the claim that all of experience and behavior deals with knowledge.
 More important may have been the fact that the new theoryrich cognitive science has been willing to take on all kinds of problems in terms of an information processing organism (animate or otherwise).
 For the time being, I have left aside the "cognitive" nature of autonomic arousal.
 However, in the spirit of cognitive imperialism one should be concerned with the kind of structural representations that would be useful theoretically and that would lead to a better understanding of the initiation, perception, and conscious construction of peripheral autonomic arousal.
 The neurosciences are charter members of the cognitive scien:es; maybe It la tijr.
e to tell the peripheral physiologists to look to their borders.
 References Kandler, G.
 Kind and emotion.
 New York: Wiley, '975.
 Kanaler, G.
 The ^trjture of val je: Accojnting for taste.
 Technical Report No.
 ''0', Center for Human Information Processing, University of California, Lar.
 Diego, May ' 98'.
 Warcel, A.
.
J.
 Conscious and 'jnconscious perception: II.
 An approach to consciojsness.
 Cognitive Psychology, '98^ in press.
 Zajonc, R.
B.
 Feeling and thljiking: Preferences need no inferences.
 American Psychologist, '980, ;5, 'S''75.
 77 Affect and Memory Representation Wendy G.
 Lehnert Department of Computer Science Yale University 1.
 Affective Knowledge Structures and Computers Many philosophers, psychologists, and A.
I.
 workers have taken various positions on the issue of machines and emotion.
 Some argue that a computer can never "experience" human emotions in any significant sense because it just doesn't make sense to attribute conscicusness to an inorganic and programmed system [Gunderson 1971, Puccetti 1968, Scriven 1960, Ziff 1959) Others argue that our subjective sense of emotional experience is too "intuitive" and illdefined a candidate for computational modelling [Dreyfus 1972, Weizenbaum 1976].
 Still others argue that emotion will be a natural and necessary consequence of intelligent information processing, an inevitable sideeffect of intelligence [Kenny 1963, Simon 1967, Doyle 1980, Slcmsn 1981].
 And then there are always "rational purists" who consider emotional experience totally irrelevant to reasoning processes and therefore, of no consequence to artificial intelligence whatsoever.
 Many lines of reasoning have been invoked to secure these various positions [Dennett 1976], although most of the arguments are conducted with a distinctively philosophical tone.
 It is ironic that the most passionate advocates in these debates rarel) argue from firsthand experience with computer simulations.
 Why does A.
I.
 seem to be so silent en the the topic of emotion and computers? I cannot speak fcr everyone in the field, but I would guess that a let of us prefer to avoid the whole morass because we believe that the questions being answered art not the questions we should be asking.
 A ccit'fuler can have knowledge of human etictional 3 ty in the same sense that it can have knowledge of mass spectroscopj, medical diagnostic techniques, or payroll data.
 Computers do not have to "be" emoting entities to use this knowledge any more than they have to "be" cher.
ists, physicians, or bureaucrats to use knowledge specific to those professions.
 If it is difficult to give knowledge of emct:.
cns to ccmtuttrs, it is on]> difficult for the same reason that a thousand other topics are difficult for ronputtrs: people do not have a rigorous understanding cf their intuitive Ur.
owledgi in terms cf inf c in'at ion processing requi t eii;er,tE , We need to develcp (1) s>mbolic systeiiis cf internal representation, and (2) processing strategies to manipulate these symbolic structures.
 These two rtquiiecient s art uiiiveissl to all A.
I.
 efforts, and the difficulties involved are not significantly amplified when tne knowledge to he encoded is knowledge of hur.
an enot ional it y.
 When ve appl) knowledge of emotions to an information processing task, we car evaluate our expertise on ei:;oticnf, by evaluating the overall effectiveness of the larger information processing system.
 What experience: has A.
I.
 had vith affective knowledge structures? Our experience is admitedly limited, but it it not totally nonexistent.
 To date, three distinct task orientations have touched on affective maiarulations of one sort or Enother.
 ]) belief systMi ir.
airtai rai.
cr 2) convevsat i cnal s iimui at i ens 3) niirrative text processii^ An ambitious implementation of belief system maintainance was attemnted by Kenneth Colby in the early 60'8 [Colby 1967; 1973].
 While Colby is best known for PARRY, the paranoid conversationalist [Colby 1975], his earlier work was aimed at a more general simulation of neurotic thought processes [Colby 1963; 1965].
 Colby was specifically interested in simulations of Freudian defense mechanisms when they surface in clinical dialogues between psychiatrists and patients.
 His work involved affective manipulations, but only in a very superficial sense.
 Colby utilized "emotion monitors" which were numerical parameters with names like "excitation," "selfesteem," "danger," "wellbeing," and "pleasure.
" While Colby's simulations were never intended to implement a complete system of affective representation, he nevertheless found it necessary to maintain and manipulate these numeric parameters.
 For example, the "excitation" monitor reflected the overall anxiety of the system  a factor that any psychotherapist would want to take into account.
 Whether or not someone's anxiety levtl can be adequately represented on a scale of 1 to 10 is another question.
 It is inevitable that belief systeir manipulations manifest them.
selves most naturally in interactive conversation.
 Colby was forced into conversational task orientaticns when he began his work on belief system.
s, and this eventually drew him toward PARRY.
 PARRY also utilized numeric parameters for "anger," "fear," and "mistrust,"  a somewhat more narrow set than was needed for generally neurotic simulations.
 While PARRY is the only conversational system that I know cf which has implemented an affective component, it is clear that any conversational system would requiie affective manipulations if it was designed to simulate emotional responses [Schank and Lehnert 1979].
 Although Colby was primarily interested in thought processes, his simulations became thoroughly mired in language processing difficulties.
 Colby's sentence processing techniques relied on lexical pattern matching routines, and his internal m.
emory representations were lexicallyoriented as well.
 Thefc devices were ineffective substitutes for natural language processing strategies, and Colby's models were significantly hampered by inadequate representational techniques [Boden 1977).
 Similar impediments were encountered by other researchers who tackled belief systems early on [see e.
g.
 Abelson 1973], so it comes as no surprise to ste that the m.
ost recent work on belief systems is thoroughly grounded in theories of natural language processing and internal memor> representation.
 [Carhonell 1978].
 Whatever one's ultimate research goal (models of belief systems, memory organization, etc.
) all dialcg simulations are prinarily natural language processing system.
s, and any attempt to circumvent this fact is destined to fail.
 In fact, when the research goal is a model cf human emotion, This work wiis supported in part by the Advanced Research Projects Agency under contract r^GOOU75cllll and ir part by the National Science Foundation under contract IST79J8463.
 78 it is far better to embrace the challanges of natural language proceBsing with open arms: a natural language processing project provides the only naturalistic and realistic laboratory for theories of affective memory representation.
 For example, narrative texts provide a rich proving ground for theories of affect  one need only look at stories that involve emotional reactions and emotional behavior.
 Yet affective knowledge representation has not been systematically tackled within natural language processing programs until very recently.
 The remainder of this paper will outline some of my own experiences in trying to implement affective knowledge structures in a narrative text processing system, BORIS.
 The BORIS system currently utilizes a limited system of affective representation and affectrelated inference mechanisms.
 In addition to these representational techniques for affects per se, the recently proposed TAU knowledge structure (Thematic Affect Unit) contributes to BORIS'S affective inference capabilities as well [Dyer 1981].
 Since descriptions of BORIS'S processing techniques can be found elsewhere [Dyer and Lehnert 1980, Lehnert, Dyer, Johnson, Yang and Harley 1981], we will not go into a description of BORIS here  we will instead take this opportunity to explain how a computational m.
odel of affect might contribute to other models of affect that are not computational in nature.
 To begin with, a computational model must address a specific set of problems to be solved.
 In language processing, affective manipulations are needed for four general inference situations: (1) Given an event description, infer an affective antecedent: "John took a Valium.
" { => John is upset) (2) Given an event description, infer an affective consequent: "John got a big raise.
" ( => John is happy) (3) Given an affective state, infer its likely antecedent: "After the hurricane, John was depressed.
" (John suffered a loss => John is depressed) (4) Given an affective state, infer its likely consequence: John was so happy about his royalty check, he made reservations at Reno Sweeny's.
 ( .
.
.
 => John intends to celebrate) In many cases, we must cocibine two or more of the above inference types to make sense of an implicit causality: "After the hurricane, John saw a shrink.
" To see how this processorientation differs from a purely psychological approach to the problem, we will look at some inferences problems in a narrative text, and see how far a nonprocessoriented model can go in helping a system like BORIS.
 When we first began to look at affect in BORIS, we were greatly inspired by Ira Roseman's model for representing affective states [Roseman 1979], There are of course other approaches to affect [deRiveria 1977, Izard 1977], but ve will not attempt to survey all the relevant proposals here.
 Readers who are familiar with alternative aystems can judge for themselves whether similar troublespots would arise in trying to implement another system.
 2.
 Conceptual Decomposition for Affective States In the Roseman system, emotional states are represented by decomposition into five dimensions.
 Four of the dimensions assume positive and negative fields, while the fifth assumes a threevalued spectrum: Five Dimensions of Affect 1) Motivational Status (desirability) [+,] 2) Situational Status (attainment) [+,1 3) Probability Status (certainty) [+,] 4) Legitimacy Status (deservedness) [+,] 5) Agency Status [self, other, circumstantial] When an event is mapped into its appropriate place on each of the five spectrums, we can predict emotional reactions to the event.
 For example, (a) wanting a ticket to a soldout Grateful Dead Concert describes a mental state with a positive motivation (wanting it) and a negative situation (not having it); (b) winning a ticket to a Grateful Dead Concert is an event with a positive motivation (wanting it) and a positive situation (having it); (c) losing the ticket has negative motivation (not wanting to lose it) and positive situation (having lost it); and (d) finding it again involves a negative motivation (not wanting it lost) with a negative situation (not having it lost).
 If all of this happens circumstantially, we expect to see (a) sorrow, (b) joy, (c) distress, and (d) relief.
 Using all five dimensions, Roseman's systen differentiates 13 primary emotions.
 These are listed below with a vector encoding of the five dimensions as listed above.
 For example, (+ + +  S) corresponds to a positive motivation, positive situation, positive probability, negative legitimacy, and selfagency.
 An "*" indicates that the corresponding dimension can assume any value.
 PRIMARY EMOTIONS M S P L A M S P L A (+ t t * C) JOY (+ +  * C) HOPE ( * C) HOPE (_ _ + * C) RELIEF (_ + + _ C) DISTRESS (_ + * ^ C) FRUSTRATION (+ _ * 4 C) FRUSTRATION (+  ^  C) SORROW (+ + * + S) PRIDE (_ _ * + S) PRIDE (* * * _ S) GUILT (+ + * * 0) LIKING (_ _ * * 0) LIKING (+  * _ 0) DISLIKING ( + * _ 0) DISLIKING ( + * + 0) ANGF.
K (+ * + 0) ANGER (+ C) FEAR • ( +  C) FEAR (+  * + S) REGRET ( + * + S) REGRET Many lexical descriptions of emotionality are used to reference more than one conceptual configuration.
 For example, John could "regret" flunking a test ( + + + S).
 Alternatively, if John got a high B on the test, he might "regret" not getting an A (+  + H S).
 These are two distinct senses of regret: we can regret what happened, and we can regret what didn't happen.
 People who dwell on ( + + 4 S) configurations kick themselves for past mistakes while people who dwell on situations involving (+  i + S) are melancholy dreamers.
 We can describe either personality in terms of past 79 regrets, but important conceptual distinctions are lurking beneath these words.
 Lexical ambiguities at the conceptual level make it difficult to describe Roseman's 13 primary emotions to everyone's satisfaction.
 For example, one could argue that "liking" is not an emotion at all but an attitude.
 The appropriate emotion for (+ + * * 0) and (  * * 0) is really one of gratitude.
 Or perhaps "distress" should be called "discomfort.
" It is instructive to engage in this sort of criticism as an intuitive exercise, but a better way to test Roseman's system is with a computer implementation.
 3.
 Implementing Affect Vnien we tried to implement Roseman's system in BORIS, we ran into some interesting difficulties.
 To get a sense of these, we will look at a sample text that BORIS processes, highlighting some problem areas encountered.
 **************************************************** A BORIS Narrative Richard hadn't heard from his old roommate Paul for years.
 Paul 4iad loaned Richard money which was never paid back, but now he had no idea where to find his old friend.
 When a letter finally arrived from San Francisco, Richard was anxious to find out how Paul was.
 Unfortunately, the news was not good.
 Paul's wife Sarah wanted a divorce.
 She also wanted the car, the house, the children, and alimony.
 Paul wanted the divorce, but he didn't want to see Sarah take everything he had.
 His salary from the state school system was very small.
 Not knowing who to turn to, he was hoping for a favor from the only lawyer he knew.
 Paul gave his home phone number in case Richard felt he could help.
 Richard eagerly picked up the phone and dialed.
 After a brief conversation, Paul agreed to have lunch with him the next day.
 He sounded extremely relieved and grateful.
 The next day, as Richard was driving to the restaurant, he barely avoided hitting an old man on the street.
 He felt extremely upset by the incident, and bad three drinks at the restaurant.
 When Paul arrived, Richard was fairly drunk.
 After the food came, Richard spilled a cup of coffee on Paul.
 Paul seemed very annoyed by this so Richard offered to drive him home for a change of clothes.
 When Paul walked into the bedroom and found Sarah with another man, he nearly had a heart attack.
 Then he realized what a blessing it was.
 With Richard there as a witness, Sarah's divorce case was shot.
 Richard congratulated Paul and suggested that they celebrate at dinner.
 Paul was eager to comply.
 **************************************************** There are a number of important affectrelated inferences in this story.
 For example, we should infer that Richard felt bad about spilling his coffee on Paul, and his offer to drive Paul home was motivated (at least in part) by a desire to alleviate guilt.
 In the next sentence, when Paul finds Sarah, we should not assume that Paul suffered a cardiac arrest; he is just very surprised.
 We must also understand why it made sense for Richard to congratulate Paul and suggest a celebration.
 What did Paul have to celebrate? Adulterous mates are not normally greeted with such enthusiasm, so the celebration must be causally connected to something else that Paul should feel good about.
 Notice that if Richard had expressed his heartfelt condolences to Paul instead of congratulating him, this would also make sense.
 Paul's affective state is complex and must be fully understood to accommodate these various possibilities.
 To make affective inferences, BORIS needed to interpret events and states from the story in terms of Roseman's five affect dimensions.
 "Motivation" and "situation" were relatively easy to recognize by relying primarily on goal states.
 But the three remaining dimensions proved to be trickier than expected.
 We will look at some difficulties in "agency" recognition, slthough similar illustrations could have been chosen from "certainty" and "legitimacy" as well.
 Initially, we thought that the agent for an event would simply be the physical actor of the event [Schank 1975].
 We quickly discovered otherwise.
 For example, in a question answering task, experimental subjects indicated that Richard was happy to receive the letter from Paul.
 He wasn't grateful, and he didn't like Paul any more than before; he was simply happy.
 In order to infer that Richard was happy to get Paul's letter, we have to ascribe a circumstantial agent when Richard gets the letter.
 If the letter's arrival was encoded with otheragency, then Richard would either like Paul or feel grateful to Paul for getting the letter.
 Simple joy can only come from circumstantial agency.
 But the letter's arrival is encoded as an MTRANS event with actor = Paul (Paul sent the letter).
 If agency is not a function of an event's actor, what is it? BORIS was (and still is) stymied by the agency problem.
 It seems that agency is a function of actors but more specifically, intentional actors.
 Notice how the affective inference changes if Richard believes that Paul sent the letter just because Paul wanted to make Richard happy.
 Now it is much more reasonable for Richard to like Paul or feel grateful to Paul for sending the letter.
 If X knowingly does Z to make Y happy, and Z succeeds in making Y happy, then Y will like X for doing it.
 If Paul does something intending to make Richard happy, then Richard experiences the event with otheragency.
 But if Paul does something which only makes Richard happy incidentally, then Richard experiences the event with circumstantialagency.
 Knowledge of an actor's ultimate intentions is needed to establish affective agency for inference purposes.
 In addition to intentionality, affective agency can be influenced by an actor's degree of social responsibility.
 For example, it makes sense that Paul got annoyed when Richard spilled coffee on him.
 But what is annoyance? Annoyance can be a variant of anger or dislike (Paul was annoyed with Richard), both of which require otheragency.
 Richard didn't intend to spill the coffee, but he was nevertheless responsible for the event (albeit innocently), and this responsibility gives us otheragency.
 Annoyance is even more ambiguous in the sense that it may also describe frustration, which involves circumstantialagency: it is rotten luck to have someone spill coffee on you.
 If Paul is upset, but not upset with Richard specifically, then his annoyance is one of pure frustration.
 80 Since "annoyed" is ambiguous, and this particular example could go either way, it is useful to look for limiting cases which force one interpretation over another.
 For example, it seems reasonable that Paul might be more annoyed with Richard for the accident since Richard was drunk.
 If Richard were sober, he would somehow be less at fault.
 Suppose a frail little old lady is carrying a cup of coffee, and as she passes by Paul she collapses from a heart attack.
 Do we expect Paul to be angry at the old lady for spilling coffee on him? Not likely.
 Now suppose a boisterous drunk lurches past Paul and drops a drink on him.
 Do we expect Paul to be angry at the drunk? Sure.
 Neither event was intended, but a drunk is more responsible for his actions than a heart attack victim.
 People choose to get drunk, but they don't choose to have heart attacks.
 The element of free will operating in a drunk renders him more responsible for his accidents: a drunk chooses to be accidentprone.
 Since BORIS has no heuristics for assessing relative degrees of responsibility, BORIS defaults to circumstantial agency and therefore interprets Paul's annoyance as one of pure frustration.
 This is not altogether right, but a more correct interpretation requires an assessment mechanism for social responsibility.
 One final problem with agency involves events that cause complex affect states.
 When Paul catches Sarah in their bedroom with another man, he witnesses and reacts to an event involving two actors.
 The event is assumed to be intentional (we are given no reason to interpret the bedroom activities as a rape) and at least one of the lovers must be responsible for it.
 So it seems that we have a clearcut candidate for otheragency.
 Since this event will save Paul from a nasty court battle and divorce settlement, it is desirable from Paul's perspective.
 Sarah's activity can therefore interpreted by Paul as a desirable, positively attained, certain, and illegitimate (she's violating their marital contract) event of otheragency (+ + +  0).
 But this configuration brings us to the improbable prediction that Paul will like Sarah and her lover, or feel grateful to them for engaging in their illicit activity.
 The difficulty with this example is the complexity of Paul's emotional state.
 He may be happy about the settlement implications, but he is probably very unhappy about his territorial rights.
 Even if he doesn't feel possessive about Sarah (Paul did say that he also wanted a divorce), he has a right to feel put out by a stranger in his bedroom, to say nothing of his bed.
 Bis privacy is surely being violated on at least one level, and we are assured of his negative reaction when we are told that he "almost had a heart attack.
" So Paul's reaction is mixed: it has a strong negative component ( + +  0) and a more farsighted positive component (+ + +  0) as well.
 This explains why it would make sense for Richard to either express sympathy or offer congratulations.
 It seems most appropriate to first offer condolences and then congratuations, but either one can be understood as a reasonable reaction on Richard's part.
 Special heuristics must be invoked for complex emotional states, and higher level knowledge structures will be needed to handle inferences in these cases.
 For example, the representational system of plot units (which grew out of our experience with BORIS'S affect analysis), includes a special structure called "hidden blessing" to handle situations like Paul's reaction to Sarah [Lebnert 1980, 1981a, 198ibl.
 The hidden bleating plot unit encodes any event that causes an initial negative reaction which later yields to a dominately positive emotion.
 A aimilar "mixed blessing" plot unit handles cases where the initial reaction is positive, but a negative emotion follows.
 In general, a plot unit is a configuration of three affect states: (1) "M" mental states with neutral affect, (2) "+" events that cause positive affects, and (3) "" events that cause negative affects.
 Each affect state is interpreted with respect to a specific character, although plot units may contain multiple affect states that involve more than one character.
 For example, the retaliation unit involves two characters and five affect states: Z ? This configuration tells us that X did something (?) which caused a negative reaction in Y ().
 This negative event motivated a mental state (M) in Y, which was subsequently actualized by a positive event (+) for Y, and a negative event () for X.
 In other words, X did something that distressed Y, so Y retaliated by doing something to distress X.
 The vertical and diagonal links in this diagram describe various causal relationships between affects states within characters and across characters.
 Affect state maps are constructed for each character in a story, as a way of tracking that character's emotional ups (i's) and downs ('s), and specific plot units are recognized when the linkages across affect states indicate that a given plot unit configuration has been encountered.
 If X were to get back at Y for Y's retaliation, we would have two instances of the retaliation plot unit sharing two common affect states: X ? (shc.
ied) » 5 A plot unit graph for a story can be generated by creating a graph node for each instantiated plot unit, and placing arcs between all pairs of plot units that share at least one common affect state.
 The above affect state map yields a graph of two nodes connected by an arc, while the BORIS divorce story involves 24 plot units in a connected graph structure.
 It appears that the connectivity features in a plot unit graph provide a strong basis for summarization algorithms.
 When a story's plot unit graph contains a pivotal node (a node with maximal connectivity), we can expect a short summary of the story to be based on the conceptual content of that pivotal node.
 For example in the BORIS divorce story, the hidden blessing unit is pivotal, and we can summarize the story by saying "Paul saved himself from a nasty divorce settlement when he 81 accidentally found his wife in bed with another man.
" The hidden blessing unit encodes Paul's discovery as an event of mixed affect states, and a synopsis of any hidden blessing has to explain what was ultimately good about an initially negative event.
 We have been experimenting with plot units primarily as a basis for narrative text summarization, [Lehnert 1980, 1981a, 1981b; Lehnert, Black, and Reiser 1981; Reiser, Lehnert, and Black 1981], but their use as a predictive knowledge structure for affective inference remains to be explored.
 Initial efforts in this direction led to the development of a slightly higher level of memory representation (Thematic Affect Units) that relates to adages and fables [Dyer 1981].
 4.
 Conclusions Our experience with Roseman's affect analysis and BORIS suggests that affective inferences are dependent on a substantial range of other inference mechanisms.
 It is not possible to study problems of affect without addressing seemingly unrelated problem areas.
 The current state of the art in language processing allows us to tackle recognition techniques involving scripts, goals, plans, interpersonal themes, plot units, and thematic affect units, all of which can contribute to affect recognition techniques.
 But affect analysis can also lead us into largely uncharted regions of intentionality and social responsibility, just to name two areas we've discussed.
 We have not attempted to compile a list of all the related knowledge needed to handle affect, because this list is likely to be a comprehensive list of all knowledge structures used for language processing.
 Interestingly enough, there will probably be no knowledge structures devoted exclusively to affect.
 One could argue that the presence of a Rosemanlike vector (+  + + S) within computational memory constitutes an affectspecific knowledge structure.
 But this structure is just a processing artifact: we do not expect to find these vectors in long or shortterm memory representations.
 If we needed to explicitly encode "John was angry," we might be reduced to vector notation, but as soon as this sentence is embedded in a context which tells us what happened to John and why he feels angry, his anger will likewise be embedded in some larger structure.
 TAU's fill this role already, and plot units (originally called "affect units") also operate along these lines.
 For example, vindictive or vengeful feelings can be readily derived from the retaliation plot unit.
 In conclusion, I would say that it is altogether too early to pass judgement on any specific representational techniques for affects.
 Roseman has supplied the computational environment with a valuable framework in which to work (or perhaps play) and other psychological theories may also prove to be valuable, although I know of no others that have been (even partially) implemented.
 This particular area is a difficult one for A.
I.
 implementations because it draws on so many other complex problem areas in memory and cognition.
 It was nevertheless valuable to attempt an implementation of Roseman's model, if only for the sake of the spinoffs that emerged.
 By confronting problems of affect representation and affectrelated inferences, we were led to the design of two new knowledge structures for narrative text analysis.
 Plot units and thematic affect unite were natural devices for solving affectoriented processing problems.
 The importance of affective knowledge structures for memory representation deserves further exploration in both the psychological and A.
I.
 research paradigms.
 Recent research in both areas has uncovered some provocative results concerning emotion and memory which pave the way for further investigations.
 From the A.
I.
 end of the world, we are seeing how the use of plot units for narrative text summarization suggests that emotional states of characters in a story play a far more central role in highlevel memory representation than was previously suspected [Lehnert 1981a].
 At the same time, psychologists are demonstrating how the moods and attitudes of experimental subjects can dramatically alter their patterns of memory retrieval [Bower 1981].
 So affects appear to play many different roles in human cognition.
 In particular, we have seen how knowledge of emotional reactions can be crucial to various information processing tasks, including narrative text comprehension.
 Still a great deal of work remains to be done if we are going to fully understand the roles of emotional knowledge and experience in human information processing.
 We must turn to psychology labs and LISP programs for the answers to our questions, putting aside the more philosophical speculations about machines and emotions.
 It will be much easier to resolve our speculative debates in the face of some solid research, and the quality of our interdisciplinary dialogs will be greatly enhanced by empirical contributions from psychology and artificial intelligence.
 BIBLIOGRAPHY Abelson, R.
P.
 (1973).
 "The Structure of Belief Systems.
" in Computer Models of.
 Thought and jjanguage.
 (eds: Schank and Colby).
 San Francisco: W.
B.
 Freeman.
 Boden, M.
 (1977).
 Artificial Intelligence and Hatural Man.
 New York: Basic Books.
 Bower, G.
 H.
 (1981).
 "Mood and Memory.
" American Psychologist.
 Vol.
 36, No.
 2.
 129148 Carbonell, J.
 G.
 (1978).
 "POLITICS: Automated Ideological Reasoning.
" Cognitive Scien^g.
 Vol.
 2, No.
 1.
 2752.
 Colby, K.
 M.
 (1963).
 "Computer Simulation of a Neurotic Process.
" in Computer Simulation fil Personality: Frontier fil Pgychp^pfcica; Research (eds: Tomkins and Messick).
 New York: Wiley.
 Colby.
 K.
 M.
 (1965).
 "Computer Simulation of Neurotic Processes.
" in Computers j.
n Biomedical Research.
 Vol.
 1_ (eds: Stacy and Waxman).
 New York: Academic Press Colby, K.
 M.
 (1967).
 "Computer Simulation and Change in Personal Belief Systems.
" Behavioral Science.
 12, 248253.
 82 Colby, K.
 M.
 (1973).
 "Simulations of Belief Systems.
" in Computer Models si.
 OSOiShL iSi.
 Language.
 (eds: Schank and Colby).
 San Francisco: W.
B.
 Freeman.
 Colby, K.
 M.
 (1975).
 Artificial ftrpppjj.
 New York: Pergamon.
 , Dennett, D.
 C.
 (1978).
 Brainstoms.
 Montgomery, Vermont: Bradford Books.
 deRivera, J.
 (1977).
 A Structural Theory sL Ihfi.
 Emotions.
 New York: International Universities Press.
 Doyle, J.
 (1980).
 "A Model for Deliberation, Action, and Introspection.
" AITR.
581, MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
 Dreyfus.
 H.
 L.
 (1972).
 What Computers Can't Djii A.
 Critique fil Artificial Reason.
 New York: Harper and Row.
 Dyer, M.
 (1981).
 "The Role of IAD's in Narratives.
" PrPCeg<î PKP SL JhS.
 Thjfj APPUflt Conference £i £]>£.
 Cognitive Science Society.
 Berkeley, Calif.
 Dyer, M.
 and Lehnert, W.
 (1980).
 "Organization and Search Processes for Narratives.
 Department of Computer Science Research Report #17 5.
 Yale University, New Haven, Conn.
 Gunderson, K.
 (1971).
 Mentality and Machines.
 New York: Doubleday.
 Izard, C.
 E.
 (1977).
 Human Emotions.
 New York: Plenum Press.
 Kenny, A.
 (1963).
 Action.
 Emotion.
 flM Will.
 London: Rout ledge and Kegan Paul.
 Lehnert, W.
 (1980).
 "Narrative Text Summarization.
" Proceedings af.
 tt£ First Annual PgtIPPP; Cppfeyepcp qs.
 Apt̂ ficjp̂  Ipte^URPPcp.
 Stanford, Calif.
 Lehnert, W.
 (1981a).
 "Plot Units and Narrative Summarization.
" Cognitive Science, (in press).
 Lehnert, W.
 (1981b).
 "Plot Units: A Narrative Summarization Strategy.
" in Strategies for Natural Language Processing.
 (eds: Lehnert and Ringle).
 New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum (in press).
 Lehnert, W.
, Black, J.
, and Reiser, B.
 (1981).
 "Summarizing Narratives.
" Proceedings of the ££X£illk JCptern̂ fjpn̂ l ipjp]: CppfpFPpce ££ Artificial Intelligence.
 Vancouver, British Columbia.
 ihs.
 CognittYt ££i£a££ SOiiSiX Berkeley, Calif.
 Roseman, I.
 (1979).
 "Cognitive aspects of emotion and emotional behavior.
" presented at the meeting of the American Psychological Association, New York.
 (unpublished manuscript.
 Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, Conn.
) Schank, R.
 (1975).
 Conceptual Information Processing.
 Amsterdam: NorthHolland.
 Schank, R.
 and Lehnert, W.
 (1979).
 "The Conceptual Content of Conversation.
" Prpceedjpgp sL EM Siŷ t> international Jpipt PPPf^rPPcp fi£ ̂x%ifi<;.
}.
̂ l IptpJ.
;?.
KPP«?e Tokyo.
 Scriven, M.
 (1960).
 "The compleat robot: a prolegomena to androidology.
" in Dimenaions of Mind; 4 Symposium.
 (Ed: S.
 Hook).
 New York: New York Universities Press.
 Simon, H.
 A.
 (1967).
 "Motivational and Emotional Controls of Cognition.
" (reprinted in Models of Thought.
 Yale University Press.
 1979) Sloman, A.
 (1981).
 "Why Robots Will Have Emotions.
" Proceedings ££.
 £ M Seventh International i£i££.
 Conference ££.
 Artificial Intelligence.
 Vancouver, British Columbia.
 Weizenbaum, J.
 (1976).
 Computer Power and Human Reason.
 San Francisco: W.
H.
 Freeman and Company.
 Ziff, P.
 (1959).
 "The feelings of robots.
" Analysis.
 No.
 19, 6468.
 Lehnert, W.
, Dyer, M.
, Johnson, P.
, Yang, C.
J.
, and Harley, S.
 (1981).
 "BORIS ~ An Experiment in InDepth Understanding of Narratives.
" Department of Computer Science Research Report #188.
 Yale University, New Haven, Conn.
 Puccetti, R.
 (1968).
 Mgiai Agents Hacmillan.
 Persons: 4 Study ai_ Possible in the Universe.
 London: Reiser, B.
, Lehnert, W.
, and Black, J.
 (1981).
 "Recognizing Thematic Units in Narratives.
" 83 SITUATION BASED EMOTION FRAMES AND THE CULTURAL CONSTRUCTION OF EMOTIONS Catherine Lutz 1.
 Introduction: Anthropological Approaches The question for this panel concerns the relevance of models of emotion for general theories of internal representation and processing.
 The particular question which I will address is that of the contributions which an anthropological or comparative approach can make to an understanding of emotional representations and emotional 'tasks'.
 In particular, I would like to suggest that we begin by looking at the way people themselves frame emotional experience and interactions.
 Much of this framing structure, moreover, is culturally provided and culturally variable.
 It can be seen in emotion word meanings, in the logic of emotional response, and in explicit ethnotheories of emotion.
 Anthropologists have begun to document a diversity of theories of mind and self (e.
g.
, Geertz, 1976; Leenhardt, 1979 (1947); Rosaldo, 1930; Strauss, 1977; White, 1931).
 Cultural knowledge systems, or 'ethnotheories,' explain why, when, and how emotion occurs, and they are embedded in more general cultural theories about the person, internal processes, and social action.
 The examination of these culturally constituted systems of knowledge can play two important roles in achieving the goals of cognitive science.
 In the first, we encounter ourselves in the other by seeing our own knowledge structures contrastingly highlighted.
 This is consonant with cognitive science's often stated aim of converting tacit understandings into explicit ones.
 Beliefs about the self are among the most tacit in any culture, as it is with them that intrapsychic and social reality are framed and felt.
 As Abelson (1979) has pointed out, one person's knowledge may appear to another as belief.
 Our 'knowledge' about emotion may turn out to be largely belief on crosscultural inspection and comparison.
 This is related to the second role for crosscultural comparison in cognitive science which is that we may learn from, as well as about, the theories of other systems.
 For example, the emotion words of other cultural groups may have different referents or slice up the affective pie in different ways than do English emotion terms.
 If one of the aims of cognitive science is to develop an abstract, logical, and unambiguous language for a scientific psychology, the ethnosemantics of emotion will be an important topic of inquiry.
 A true science of affect needs a language which is transcultural.
 Our most basic Western ideas about what constitutes humanness — ideas which are dramatically evident in debates over whether computers can "feel emotion"  form an implicit frame for our inquiries.
 The nature of this frame explains why emotion has been neglected, not only in cognitive science.
 but in social science generally.
 The traditional and still current concern has been with emotion as physical sensation.
 Internal feelings are presumed to be the primary referents of emotion words, and they are therefore seen as difficult to talk about — emotions are, in this cultural framework, internal, private, preverbal states.
 Affect is not accidently omitted from the classic social science problem termed 'language and thought'.
' Although it has more recently been acknowledged that one may think about how one feels and feel about how one thinks, the dichotomy of cognition artd affect remains fundamental even in attempts to 'bridge' the gap between them.
 We have value stances, moreover, towards the concepts and relations of our theories, and we are ambivalent about emotion.
 On the one hand, cognition is seen as 'higher' in evolutionary and other senses than emotion.
 Lakoff and Johnson (1930) present some striking evidence in English metaphors that emotion is so viewed.
 Metaphors which they term 'orientational' indicate that 'good', 'high status', 'control', and 'rational' are 'up', while 'bad', 'low status', 'being controlled', and 'emotional' are 'down' (1980: 1417).
 The mature person ideally controls affect with thought.
 'Intelligence', as that term is commonly defined in American English, refers to cognitive abilities, with 'emotional ability' being somewhat of a contradiction in terms.
2 Emotion is instinctual, inchoate, formless, but at the same time it may also be positively valued.
 In scientific psychological terms, emotion is motivational and causes behavior.
 It is the life force, a sacred center.
 To claim emotion for computers, then, is sacrilege.
 For the above reasons, attempts at the 'cold' examination of a 'hot' topic (Abelson, 1963) appear to us, as Americans, both quixotic and profane.
 I would propose that we proceed on the assumption that the terms 'cognition' and 'affect' represent, not dual and separate processes (Zajonc, 1930), but ideal types placed at the ends of a true continuum of more or less immediate and more or less motivated processing of events or situations.
 While emotion is the human potential for extremely high speed and actionoriented processing, emotions, are culturally constructed concepts which point to clusters of situations typically calling for some kind of action.
 Many of these situation clusters will be universal while some will be environmentally specific.
 In the simplest example, one language group may code sudden events and dangerous events under the same rubric while another community might distinguish them.
 Those situations which will be universally framed together via emotion words will be those for which responses  such as movement towards others or flight — are shared and necessitated by the requisites of human social life.
 As D'Andrade has pointed out, a person who simply 'thought' coolly about acquiring food would have little chance of survival if that thought were easily extinguished and did not motivate remembering and action (1930: 16).
 84 Such an affectless person could note that someone was in the process of stealing her car but, in the absence of anger, could be easily called off to play bingo.
 Why do human communities need emotion words? It is not simply to name internal states.
 Emotion words are important primarily as communicators of one's perception of the occurrence of a particularly salient situation frame.
 The use of emotion words can often involve "backwards inferencing" on the part of listeners about the events which led up to the speaker's statement (White, 1979).
 In using emotion words, people also communicate the behavior which is likely to follow on their part.
 As one of the most crucial functions of social groups lies in their organization and regulation of individual behavior, emotion words are necessary for the most efficient and judicious coordination of plans, understanding, and behavior.
 By clustering situations which share action plans and other dimensions of meaning, emotion words facilitate such coordination both on the intra and the interpsychic levels.
 2.
 Emotion Frames The framing of emotion occurs at many levels.
 What has been and is here meant by a 'frame'? Interest in the framing of knowledge and social interaction has been widespread in social science.
 Attempts have been made to find personcentered, rather than investigatororiginated, breaks in the stream of mental and social reality with a view to understanding how the psychologically and culturally constructed framed units organize human experience.
 These units have been a variety of cognitive ones (Minsky, 1975; Rumelhart and Ortony, 1976); they have been linguistic units which frame one or more concept, logical relation, or cultiural proposition (Black and Metzger, 1965; Rosch, 1977); they have been situational units whose definition is a function of the transformation of "physical space and chronological time.
.
.
 into social space and social time" (McHugh, 1968: 3; see also Hall, 1977: 129140); they may be contexts of interaction, the bracketing of which transforms an event into one with fundamentally different meanings and epistemological and behavioral entailments (Bateson, 1972: 177193; Goffman, 1974); and on the most global level cultural groups are themselves framed by shared knowledge systems, customs, and world view — an event which is framed in an East African culture may have very different meaning than that 'same' event framed in French culture.
 Crosscultural and interpersonal understanding — emotional and otherwise — occurs only to the extent that there is a shared and agreed upon or a constructed frame for interaction.
 There appears to be a growing recognition in psychology that the more inclusive frames are just that, rather than simply variables, and that the more microlevel frames are embedded in them.
 This is seen in the increasing concern with what is termed 'world knowledge'.
 It is also seen in the recent interest in metacognition (A.
 Brown, 1973; Flavell, 1976, 1973).
 Metacognition, or thinking about thought processes, is the ability to introspect about, monitor, and control those processes (Brown and Barclay 1976: 72).
 More basically, the term metacognition has been used to refer also to the awareness of the existence, nature, variables, and integration of cognitive processes (Wellman, n.
d.
).
 The importance of examining the phenomenon of metacognition lies in its potential role in the molding of more microlevel processes.
 There is an important bridge to be built between these notions about metacognition and emerging anthropological concerns with ethnotheories of self and psychological process.
 Although work in metacognition has tended to be based on the assumption that these abilities and knowledge are culturefree, the child develops in a cultural milieu replete with explicit and implicit ideas about how one internally and socially operates.
 The child receives training in metacognitive skills in the context of that culture's typical learning settings.
 The psychologist's metacognitive skills and the anthropologist's ethnotheories thus constitute and constrain each other.
 The concept of 'metacognition' should be seen, however, in the same ideal typical light in which we are here placing 'cognition', with 'metaemotion' coined to describe the more immediate and actionoriented processing of our processing.
 These metaskills can be conceptualized, like cognition and affect, as points along a continuum of delay and immediacy and of passivity and behavioral implication.
 To Brown and Barclay's list of metamemorial skills  introspection, monitoring, and control (1976: 72)  we must add, however, the evaluation of one's own cognitive and emotional processing.
 The skills of control and evaluation fall towards the same end of this continuum as does affect.
 People have knowledge concerning emotions and their place in the workings of the self and relationships, and they evaluate particular emotions (for example, 'righteous indignation is good', 'hate is bad', 'regret is good') and emotion in general.
 The inseparability of value and knowledge is seen in the fact that people in cultures which do not value a particular type of processing skill (such as intuition) will, according to the evidence accumulating in the fields of both metacognition and crosscultural psychology, do less of such processing.
 Cultural values and knowledge determine what we term emotional experience, that is, they structure the way in which we frame events as salient, frame expressive communications from others as meaningful, and frame our own emotions linguistically and behaviorally.
3 3.
 Ifaluk Theories of Emotion and Situation Frames.
 The Ifaluk are a Micronesian people whose adaptation to their coral islet environment has been notably successful and resistent to colonial influences.
 Their onehalf square mile atoll is densely populated, supporting 430 people on a diet extracted through fishing, horticulture, and gathering.
 Their society is organized 85 through the ranking of individuals based on their clan and lineage affiliations, gender, and age.
 Several chiefs head the matrilineal clans, and organize islandwide activities.
 The absence of physical aggression on Ifaluk marks it as one of the world's least violent societies.
 Ghosts of ancestral and other varieties are ubiquitous and dangerous, although they may also bring protection from typhoons and disease.
 The Ifaluk have a rich body of knowledge about the nature of the person and emotion (Lutz, 1930, 1931).
 Although they do not distinguish emotion from thought, and do not have a monolexeme for either, they do label two closely related but nonetheless distinct types of internal processes, one more willful (tip) than the other (nunuwan), more a product of individual desire than of social conformity or social intelligence.
 The Ifaluk words which we would call emotion words can be used to modify either of these two process terms.
 The Ifaluk evaluation of emotion, that is, their metaemotional attitude, is a very positive one.
 Emotion is viewed as inextricably part of thought, and the correct understanding and behavioral enactments of emotions, both pleasant and unpleasant, are seen as signs of maturity.
 The mentally ill on Ifaluk are marked, in the indigenous view, by deficiencies in the ability to display both emotional and more technological understandings.
 Their view here interestingly converges with those of researchers recently working on the emotionalcognitive development of Down's syndrome infants (Cicchetti and Sroufe, 1976; Emde, Katz and Thorpe, 1973).
 Emotion is a 'covert' category (C.
 Brown, 1974) for the Ifaluk.
 A domain of words exists which informants separate from others in sorting tasks.
 This domain includes words whose primary referents are organismenvironment interactions.
 Ifaluk emotion words are defined by the situations in which people experience them.
 English emotion words, by contrast, foreground the organism response, with physiological signs (Davitz, 1969) taken as 'symptoms' of an internal event, rather than an external one.
 The two ethnotheoretical systems overlap to an important degree, however.
 While the Ifaluk have a less elaborate model of physiological correlates of events, some English emotion definitions point to the existence of a secondary situational model.
 Joel Davitz, in his book The Language of Emotion, presents data on the meanings of emotion words for 50 American informants in a dictionarylike format.
 Data collection began in an openended manner, with people being asked to describe their experiences of each of 50 different emotions.
 A checklist was developed out of a large and representative sample of descriptive phrases.
 This checklist was presented to another 50 individuals to get comparable and quantifiable descriptors for the 50 emotions.
 The overwhelming emphasis on physiological state is evidenced, for example, in the definition of 'anger'.
 The following descriptions are listed in order of frequency (numbers in parentheses are percentages of the sample who checked each item).
 my blood pressure goes up.
.
.
(72); I'm easily irritated.
.
.
(64); I seem to be caught up and overwhelmed by the feeling (64); my face and mouth are tight, tense, hard (60); there is an excitement, a sense of being keyed up, overstimulated, supercharged (58); my pulse quickens (56); my body seems to speed up (54); there is a quickening of heartbeat (52); my fists are clenched (52) (Davitz, 1969: 35).
 Contrast the meaning of 'anger' with the following definitions of the Ifaluk emotion word, song, which may be translated as 'justified anger'.
 "We are song from some gossip we hear [about ourselves which is not true], if someone talks a lot at us, [or] if the pig comes and eats food I just made.
" "If someone doesn't give me something I [legitimately] ask for, I'm song.
" The evidence for the centrality of situation as a frame for Ifaluk emotional experience and understanding is found in several kinds of data.
 As just mentioned, folk definitions of emotion words are predominantly given in a form similar to the following, 'Emotion X is when someone steals my bananas', or 'If your child dies, then emotion Y'.
 Secondly, daily conversations abound in which emotion is explicitly discussed.
 Emotions of the self and others are spoken of in terms of their environmental or situational causes and correlates.
 Physical symptoms are not a salient topic of conversation.
 A third source of data is sorting tasks in which people were asked to pilesort cards with Ifaluk emotion words on them.
 Posttest questioning of people about the rationale for their sorting decisions produces answers which most commonly cite a common eliciting situation or situation type, or alternately a sequence of situations (Lutz, 1932).
 Examples include, "These [emotion] words all go together because they all occur when we are interrupted in our work", and "They all involve something happening that we want [to happen].
" The Ifaluk logic of emotion is based on propositions about the parameters and meaning of commonly occurring situations.
 Why, then, and on what criteria do the Ifaluk frame something as a situation and frame diverse situations within the confines of a single emotion word? Let us return to the example of the word song, which has been translated as 'justified anger'.
 The prototypical situation which causes song is one in which another person has violated a cultural rule or value.
 Included are both situations where ego or a relative of ego suffers as a result and situations where it is simply cultural principle which is at issue, with no one directly disadvantaged as a result.
 Specifically, some of the commonly associated situations include hearing false gossip about oneself, encountering someone whose personality does not conform with the cultural values of generosity, calmness, eventemper, and respectfulness, being 86 excluded from the emotional and material support expected from kinspersons and others, and hearing of the violation of a taboo such as that against walking upright in front of the men's house.
 'Anger' can also be defined by its situational correlates.
 Americans will define a frustrating situation as one in which anger typically occurs.
 'Anger', according to Carroll Izard, arises in situations where one is either physically or psychologically restrained from doing what one intensely desires to do.
 The restraint may be in terms of physical barriers, rules and regulations, or one's own incapability (Izard, 1977: 329330).
 Brown and Herrnstein define 'anger' as the "illegitimate disappointment of legitimate expectations" (1975: 274).
 Although their definition is more restrictive than that of Izard, they are not contradictory.
 As Brown and Herrnstein point out, legitimacy is "neither universally acknowledged nor unchanging" (1975: 279).
 America is a polycultural and complex society, and there is much disagreement over values, rules, and regulations.
 This, and the value placed on individual achievement, make it unsurprising, therefore, that 'anger' may be evoked in situations where one's own individual goals (based on one's personal sense of the legitimacy of those goals) are blocked.
 The restraints and rules which Izard speaks of as eliciting 'anger' in Americans are seen as the correct and moral order on Ifaluk.
 A separate term, ngush, describes the state of being required to conform to a valid cultural rule which is nonetheless frustrating of other individual goals such as comfort.
 Although the goals of individuals will be occasionally blocked in every culture, the definition of the situation in which one is blocked will vary from culture to culture, as will the subsequent emotional reaction (Whiting, 1944).
 The socialization process results in the molding of goals.
 The American child comes to expect certain kinds of achievement from her or himself.
 "Standing on your own two feet", "Making it", and "Proving yourself" are cultural aphorisms which reflect the types of independence and achievement goals which are acquired.
 The Ifaluk child, on the other hand, comes to operate with goals dictated by the values of sharing and interpersonal dependence.
 The behavioral implications of these values are outlined in cultural rules which provide for the equal distribution of everything from food to children and, conversely, for the equal distribution of sacrifice and restraint.
 The 'crazy' person on Ifaluk is partially defined as one who spends too much time alone, or thinks only of her or his own needs.
 Important differences in the nature, and hence the translations, of song and 'anger' flow from these differences in culturally constituted goals.
 It is for such reasons that American 'anger' results from "incapability" (Izard, 1977) while song results from the failure of the other to conform to group goals.
 In attempting to compare emotion words across cultures, it can be seen that neither can the referent be assumed without examination of ethnopsychological theories in which they are embedded nor can the translation process be anything but primary.
 The translation of song as 'anger', or even as the more accurate 'justified anger', tends to erroneously suggest that the two terms share common referents and webs of ethnotheoretical meaning.
 A first step towards improving the accuracy of translation of emotion words might be to use situations rather than feeling tone as the primary criteria for mapping an emotion word in one language onto one or more emotion words in another language (Lutz, 1930).
 Three final suggestions are in order about the general relationship between situation and emotion.
 Although the storage of emotional meaning in situation frames is particularly explicit in Ifaluk ethnotheory, the work of Minsky (1975) and others suggests that the situation might be a universal frame for many kinds of experience, as it represents an especially efficient way of storing related bits of information.
 The efficiency of this storage method might be enhanced, moreover, by certain types of metaemotional evaluations and controls and by developed metacognitive approaches to the situational coding of emotion.
 Secondly, the function of emotion words may importantly consist of their linking of situations in a culturally meaningful way.
 'Anger' links a certain group of situations, while song links another.
 Cultural adaptation calls for varieties of responses to the same 'objective" circumstances.
 Situations are correlated by their shared relationship to a particular cultural value and by the types of action which follow from them.
 Emotion words code these environmental correlations, and thus provide for understanding of self and social life.
 Finally, the situations which are correlates and constituters of emotion in Ifaluk ethnopsychological theory are commonly occurring ones, such as confronting a task for which one is illprepared, observing a rule violation, or having one's child fall ill.
 These situation based emotion frames organize behavior through their links to action plans.
 Schank and Abelson claim that frequently encountered events usually require the development of accompanying scripts.
 These scripts are "highly stylized ways of executing planboxes" (1977: 96), while plans are the ranges of choices dictated by a particular goal.
 Thus we expect that Ifaluk cultural values, from which many individual goals originate, would contribute both to the framing of situations under a common emotion term, and to the available interactional script that dictates behavior in the emotion defined situation.
 We and the Ifaluk need emotion words to communicate definitions of the situation and intended plans of action.
 This and other ethnopsychological theories have much to teach us about the cultural 87 blinders which we affect.
 Through of emotion frames situational, and able to identify only in particula and those which a take with us to the study of the comparative investigation including the linguistic, ethnotheoretic, we may be those frames which emerge r environmental circumstances re universally meaningful.
 Notes Acknowledgements.
 I would like to thank Geoffrey White for helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper.
 1.
 There are various forms in which the Whorfian hypothesis on the linguistic determination of thought may be construed from the strongest, in which nonverbal cognitive activity is patterned by language, to the weakest, in which only the perception of absent stimuli (i.
e.
, memory) is strongly influenced (Miller and McNeil cited in Lemon, 1931: 202203).
 If we include affect as part of the same continuum of internal processing on which thought is found (see below), the modeling of relationships between language and other processing will need to take account of both affect and cognition.
 We should expect that, under certain types of conditions of emotion activation, one or another version of the Whorfian hypothesis may apply.
 2.
 For views of emotion as intelligence, see D'Andrade, 1930:1517; Lutz andLeVine, n.
d.
; Meichenbaum, 1930: 274273.
 3.
 The sociologist Arlie Hochschild's (1979) notion of 'emotion work' is relevant here as a conceptualization of the way in which emotion knowledge structures ('feeling rules' in her scheme) affect emotional experience itself.
 In her view, these structures are provided by ideology and, in particular, by social 'feeling rules'.
 These rules govern not only behavior, but feelings themselves, and hence are not merely the 'display rules' of Ekman (1974).
 References ABELSON, R.
 Computer simulation of 'hot' cognition.
 In S.
 Tompkins and S.
 Messick (Eds.
), Computer Simulation of Personality.
 New York: John Wiley, 1963.
 ABELSON, R.
 Belief and knowledge systems.
 Cognitive Science, 1979, 3̂ , 355366.
 BATESON, G.
 Steps to an Ecology of Mind.
 New York: Ballantine Books, 1972, pp.
 177193.
 BLACK, M.
, and METZGER, D.
 Ethnographic description and the study of law.
 American Anthropologist, 1965, 67, 6(2), 141165.
 — BROWN, A.
 Knowing when, where and how to remember: A problem of metacognition.
 In R.
 Glaser (Ed.
), Advances in Instructional Psychology.
 Hillsdale, N.
 J.
: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1973.
 BROWN, A.
, and BARCLAY, C.
 The effects of training specific mnemonics on the metamnemonic efficiency of retarded children.
 Child Development, 1976, 47, 7030.
 BROWN, C.
 Unique beginners and covert categories in folk biological taxonomies.
 American Anthropologist, 1974, 76, 325327: ~ BROWN, R.
, and HERRNSTEIN, R.
 Psychology.
 Boston: Little, Brown, 1975.
 CICCHETTI, D.
, and SROUFE, L.
 A.
 The relationship between affective and cognitive development in Down's syndrome infants.
 Child Development, 1976, 47̂ , 920929.
 D'ANDRADE, R.
 The cultural part of cognition.
 Address given to the Second Annual Cognitive Science Conference, New Haven, 1930.
 DAVITZ, J.
 The Language of Emotion.
 New York: Academic Press, 1969.
 EKMAN, P.
 Universal facial expressions of emotion.
 In R.
 LeVine (Ed.
), Culture and Personality: Contemporary Readings.
 Chicago: Aldme, 1974.
 EMDE, R.
, KATZ, E.
, and THORPE, J.
 Emotional expression in infancy: II.
 Early deviations in Down's syndrome.
 In M.
 Lewis and L.
 Rosenblum (Eds.
), The Development of Affect.
 New York: Plenum Press, 1973.
 FLAVELL, J.
 Metacognitive aspects of problem solving.
 In L.
 Resnick (Ed.
), The Origins of Intelligence.
 Hillsdale, N.
 J.
: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1976.
 FLAVELL, J.
 Metacognitive development.
 In J.
 M.
 Scandura and C.
 J.
 Brainard (Eds.
), Structural/Process Theories of Complex Human Behavior.
 Alphen a.
 1.
 Ryn, The Netherlands: Sijthoff and Noordhoff, 1973.
 88 GEERTZ, c.
 "From the native's point of view": On the nature of anthropological understanding.
 In K.
 Basso and H.
 Selby (Eds.
), Meaning in Anthropology.
 Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1976.
 GOFFMAN, E.
 Frame Analysis; An Essay on the Organization of Experience.
 Cambridge; Harvard University Press, 1974.
 HALL, E.
 T.
 Beyond Culture.
 New York; Anchor Press, 1977 (1976).
 HOCHSCHILD, A, Emotion work, feeling rules, and social structure.
 American Journal of Sociology, 1979, 35^, 551595.
 IZARD, C.
 E.
 Human Emotions.
 New York; Plenum Press, 191T.
 LAKOFF, G.
, and JOHNSON, M.
 Metaphors We Live By.
 Chicago; University ot Chicago Press, By.
 CI TTao.
 LEENHARDT, M.
 Do Kamo.
 Chicago; University of Chicago Press, 1979 (1947).
 LEMON, N.
 Language and learning: Some observations on the linguistic determination of cognitive processes.
 In B.
 Lloyd and J.
 Gay (Eds.
), Universals of Human Thought; Some African Evidence.
 New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
 LUTZ, C.
 Emotion words and emotional development on Ifaluk atoll.
 Ph.
D.
 Dissertation, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass.
, 1930.
 LUTZ, C.
 Talking about 'our insides': Ifaluk conceptions of the self.
 Paper presented at the Tenth Annual Meeting of the Association for Social Anthropology in Oceania, San Diego, 1981.
 ROSCH, E.
 Human categorization.
 In N.
 Warren (Ed.
), Advances in CrossCultural Psychology.
 Vol.
 I.
 London: Academic Priss, 1977.
 RUMELHART, D.
 E.
, and ORTONY, A.
 The representation of knowledge in memory.
 In R.
 C.
 Anderson, R.
 Spiro, and W.
 E.
 Montague (Eds.
), Schooling and the Acquisition of Knowledge.
 Hillsdale, N.
 J.
; Lawrence Erlbaum, 1976.
 SCHANK, R.
, and ABELSON, R.
 Scripts, Plans, Goals, and Understanding: An Inquiry' into Human Knowledge Systems^ Hillsdale, N.
 J.
; Lawrence Erlbaxim, 1977.
 STRAUSS, A, Northern Cheyenne ethnopsychology.
 Ethos, 1977.
 5, 326357.
 WELLMAN, H.
 A child's theory of mind; The development of conceptions of cognition.
 In S.
 Yussen (Ed.
), The Growth of Insight in the Child.
 New York: Academic Press, forthcoming.
 WHITE, G.
 Some social uses of emotion language: A Melanesian example.
 Paper presented at the 78th Annual Meeting of the American Anthropological Association, Cincinnati, 1979.
 WHITE, G.
 'Person' and 'emotion' in A'ara ethnopsychology.
 Paper presented at the Tenth Annual Meeting of the Association for Social Anthropology in Oceania, San Diego, 1931.
 WHITING, J.
 W.
 M.
 The frustration complex in Kwoma society.
 Man, 1944, 115, 140144.
 ZAJONC, R.
 B.
 Feeling and thinking: Preferences need no inferences.
 American Psychologist, 1930, 35_, 151175.
 LUTZ, C.
 The domain of emotion words on Ifaluk.
 American Ethnologist, 1932, 9_, in press.
 LUTZ, C, and LEVINE, R.
 Culture and intelligence in infancy: An ethnopsychological view.
 In M.
 Lewis (Ed.
), The Origins of Intelligence.
 2nd edition.
 New York: Plenum Press, forthcoming.
 MCHUGH, P.
 Defining the Situation: The Organization ot Meaning in Social Interaction.
 New York; BobbsMerrill, 13^^.
 MEICHENBAUM, D.
 A cognitivebehavioral perspective on intelligence.
 Intelligence, 1930, 4, 271233.
 MINSKY, M.
 L.
 A framework for representing knowledge.
 In P.
 H.
 Winston (Ed.
), The Psychology of Computer Vision.
 New York: McGrawHill, 197 5.
 ROSALDO, M.
 Knowledge and Passion: Ilongot Notions of Self and Social Life.
 New York: Cambridge University Press, 1930.
 89 Disentangling the Affective Lexicon Andrew Ortony and Gerald L.
 Clore University of Illinois at UrbanaChampalgn When social psychologists and personality theorists Investigate traits and emotions they frequently rely on lists of words that denote, or are thought to denote, traits, or emotions, or feelings.
 A classic problem In such work is that there is no unambiguous way of specifying which words refer to emotions, which refer to traits, and which refer to other behaviors, and nonemotional states.
 Investigators have generally relied on their intuitions in these matters, and by and large agreement has not been very high.
 This problem Is not so severe in lists of personalltytralt words, largely because many modern empirical studies involving trait descriptors choose their terms from one of several "standardized" lists.
 For example, social psychologists frequently draw from the list of 555 words compiled by Anderson (1968).
 This list was developed by selecting feasible candidates from the 18,000 words appearing in Allport and Odbert's (1936) classic monograph.
 From the resulting reduced list of 2200 words, Anderson removed extreme words (e.
g.
 majestic), words designating temporary states (e.
g.
 aghast), words having to do with physical characteristics (e.
g.
 hairy), strongly sexlinked words (e.
g.
 alluring), and other words considered unsuitable as ingredients in impression formation (e.
g.
 fond).
 Finally, words found to be unfamiliar to college students were eliminated.
 Although Anderson's list was also determined primarily on the basis of Intuition, and although it does contain some ambiguous words (for example, happy, while certainly designating a trait, also can designate an emotion), it nevertheless has sufficient face validity to have gained wide acceptance.
 Those who would study the emotions are less fortunate.
 Whether one seeks to map out the cognitive basis of the emotions, as we do, or whether one Is Investigating the effects of emotions on behavior, or of behavior on emotions, an indiscriminate use of language can be dangerously misleading In both theory construction and in the conduct of research.
 Many of the words In lists used in studying emotions either do not designate the kinds of states they are Intended to, or they are ambiguous between different kinds of states.
 The indiscriminate use of such lists in theoretical and empirical research poses a serious methodological problem.
 For example, Russell (1980) scaled 28 "emotiondenoting adjectives".
 He found "sleepiness" to be an Important dimension of such words.
 Although he lists the words used in his studies, he provides no justification for their inclusion and he describes no method for their selection.
 He included words like bored, tired, sleepy, drowsy, tranquil, and relaxed; we do not think that such terms denote emotions at all.
 If one Includes among one's stimuli, words that have a high loading on sleepiness, sleepiness will turn out to be a factor.
 Until the inclusion of such words in the stimulus set can be justified, generalizations about the structure of the emotions have to be regarded as suspect.
 The specification of necessary and sufficient criteria for emotions is a notoriously difficult if not an impossible goal.
 But because the employment of linguistic stimuli is an important avenue into the study of the emotions, some alternative method Is needed for identifying emotion words.
 What we propose In this paper can be viewed as the linguistic groundwork required for languagebased studies of the emotions and other affectrelated terms.
 The problem means unique to where It is dlffi explicit about t where psychologis the Intuitions of classifications.
 (e.
g.
 Rosch, 19 categorization o example.
 that we are dealing with is by nc this domain.
 There are many areas cult or impossible to be entirely he criteria for class membership, but ts have relied on rating scales and judges to achieve reliable and valid The work of Rosch and her colleagues 78; Rosch & Mervls, 1975) on the f concrete objects is an obvious In the present context, one possibility would be to present subjects with candidate emotion words and ask how good good they are as examples of emotions.
 This we plan to do.
 However, as the sole strategy, this approach has drawbacks related to not knowing what criteria subjects employ in their Judgments, and consequently It raises troublesome problems about reliability.
 Thus, as a first step, we chose to employ a number of explicit tests that we hope offer greater reliability and that provide potentially useful additional information about the structure of the affective lexicon.
 These tests constitute a set of heuristics for isolating genuine emotion words (and other kinds of words) from a list of putative emotion words.
 They take the form of a group of sentence frames into which a candidate word is inserted.
 The tests are "passed" or "failed" by a particular word depending on the extent to which groups of judges consider the resulting sentences to be meaningful rather than anomalous.
 Finally, it should be emphasized that we think of these tests as a set of heuristics or "rules of thumb" rather than as an algorithm.
 Nevertheless, we think that they do a tolerable job of disentangling the affective lexicon—certainly a better job than blind intuition, or than no criteria at all.
 While our primary goal is to Isolate the genuine emotion words from a pool of candidate emotion words, we also consider it interesting to attempt to classify the major kinds of words appearing in the pool.
 The pool comprises the union of several lists claiming to be lists of emotions and/or of feelings.
 In constructing it we drew primarily from lists used in various psychological treatments of emotion (Bush, 1972; Dahl & Stengel, 1978; Davitz, 1969; Russell, 1980).
 The final pool consisted of about 500 words, the largest contribution coming from Dahl and Stengel's extensive list.
 A sizeable number also came from Bush (1972), who had reduced a prior list of 2,186 adjectives from Allport and Odbert (1936).
 From these Bush selected the 263 words that raters agreed were more relevant to emotions ("what a person feels") than to personality ("what a person is like") or to behavior ("what a person does").
 Also Included was Davltz's list of words from Roget's Thesaurus, and other smaller lists.
 We found as we examined these lists that while we could not give a satisfactory definition of an emotion, we could readily eliminate many of the candidates as words that did not refer to emotions.
 For example.
 In the lists of words designating emotions and feelings used by Dahl and Stengel (1978) or Bush (1972), there are numerous "Intruders" such as tired, hungry, breathless, and revived— words which seem to designate body states, a"nd words like confused, baffled, and sure, which seem to represent 90 aonaffectlve cognitive states.
 Still other entries nice abandoned, abused, and appreciated represent the acts or beliefs of others relevant to the self; they could certainly cause emotions but do not themselves denote emotions.
 The linguistic tests that we propose are attempts to classify such "Intruders" In a reasonably systematic way while also separating out emotion words.
 The first distinction we make Is between words that designate traits or emotions and words that do not.
 Words that do designate traits or emotions are of three kinds: (a) "pure" trait words, which refer only to traits (and not to emotions), (e.
g.
 studious, ambitious, mean), (b) "pure" emotion words, which refer only to emotions (and not to traits) (e.
g.
 jubilant, distressed, embarrassed), and (c) polysemous words that can be used to refer to both emotions and traits (e.
g.
 cheerful, happy, proud).
 For brevity we shall refer to such words as "emotlontralt hybrids".
 Although less central to our concerns, still of Interest are the three kinds of words already mentioned that constitute the other half of the pool.
 These we call "bodystate" words, "cognitivestate" words, and "otheraction" words.
 The tests that we discuss in this paper are all designed to deal with adjectives or participial forms.
 Rephrasing of the tests is required to handle noun and verb forms.
 Words denoting emotions or traits The first test that we propose is actually a pair of sentence frames.
 One, Frame A, deals with negatively valenced words, and one.
 Frame B, deals with positively valenced ones.
 These frames can be thought of as linguistic filters.
 Their logic is to contrast candidate words with something explicitly emotional so that words that do not denote emotions will produce meaningful (as opposed to anomalous) sentences.
 The test separates the entire pool into two halves: (a) an item that fails the test (i.
e.
 produces an anomalous sentence) is most probably a word that denotes a trait or an emotion, and, (b) an item that passes the test (i.
e.
 produces an acceptable sentence) is probably a bodystate word, an otheraction word, or a cognitivestate word.
 Thus, the test Is intended to allow as sensible completions only words like puzzled and certain (cognitivestate words), breathless and refreshed (bodystate words), and abandoned and appreciated (otheraction words).
 Test 1.
 Frame A: Although at that moment Mary was xxxxx, she was emotionally content Frame B: Although at that moment Mary was xxxxx, she was not emotionally content The word although anticipates a contrast, and in the contexts of these frames, it is a contrast of valence.
 However, the presence of the phrase emotionally content, constrains the contrast to nonemotional terms.
 Accordingly, emotion words will fail the test, but bodystate words, cognitivestate words, and otheraction words all pass it.
 For example, words like breathless, puzzled, and abandoned pass the test because they fit the sentence frame for negative words (Frame A ) , and words like refreshed, certain, and appreciated pass because they fit the frame for positive words (Frame B).
 Traits are prevented from fitting into the sentence frames by incorporating in the frames a reference to a particular moment so that a quality that is enduring will give rise to an anomalous sentence.
 Thus, trait emotion words fail the test (e.
g.
 jubilant, and distressed).
 Since our primary goal is to separate trait descriptors from emotion words, we shall deal first with that part of the Initial pool that fails Test 1.
 Recall, first, that terms like proud, sad, and happy are sometimes used as trait descriptors and sometimes as emotion words.
 Thus, the half of the pool containing traits and emotions actually contains words of three kinds—the "pure" emotion words that unambiguously designate emotions (e.
g.
 embarrassed, disgusted, Jubilant), the "pure" trait words that unambiguously designate traits (e.
g.
 thrifty, intelligent, studious, dishonest), and the "emotiontrait hybrid" words that have two senses, one referring to an emotion and one to a trait.
 The test that we now describe is designed to separate pure trait terms and emotiontrait hybrids from pure emotion terms.
 Because the context provided by the sentence frame resists temporary states in favor of perservering qualities, it allows as sensible completions only traits and hybrid words with a trait as one meaning.
 Test 2: John was wellknown as a(n) xxxxx person The result of applying this test is to separate examples like the following: (PASS) pure traits and hybrids anxious happy proud materialistic superstitious (FAIL) pure emotions disgusted distressed embarrassed jubilant lovesick In order to separate the hybrids from the pure traits, another test.
 Test 3, is needed.
 This test may be applied to the same set of words as Test 2.
 The hybrids can then be isolated by taking the intersection of words passing Test 2 and of those passing Test 3.
 This is because Test 2 detects words that have trait readings, while Test 3 detects that subset of them that also have emotion readings (see Fig.
 1).
 The rationale behind Test 3 is that emotions can be experienced to varying degrees, and can be experienced in the absence of an interpersonal exchange.
 Thus, reflecting on a situation can give rise to an emotion but not to a trait, although, if a term is ambiguous as between a trait and an emotion, it will fit the test because of its emotion sense.
 Test 3: As he reflected on what had happened, John was quite xxxxx The result of applying this test is to separate examples like the following: (PASS) pure emotions and hybrids cheerful distressed disgusted ecstatic frightened proud (FAIL) pure traits ambitious intelligent knowledgeable mean sensitive thrifty words as well as honest, unkind, 91 PASS ( E H B A R R A 5 S E 0 SUPERS IT I T lOUS JUBILANT MATERIALISTIC ANXIOUS PROUD PURE f„nTinw tbhit ''^'^^ ;ted\ /^ EMBARRASSEo\ \^ JUBILANT J PURE EMOTIONS TEST 3 TEST 2 EMBARRASSED^ JUBILANT J SUPERSTITIOUS / ANXIOUS MATERIALISTIC \ PROUD SUPERSTITIOUS MATERIALISTIC APPRECIATED NEGLECTED TIRED DROWSr BORED j "V INTERESTED y' ° ^""" BODYSTATES "GNITIVE" ACTIONS "̂"̂  ̂ *̂̂ " STATES See FI9.
 2 PURE TRAITS HYBRIDS PURE EMOTIONS PURE TRAITS Figure 1.
 Our primary goal has now been achieved.
 We think we have proposed a reasonably methodical procedure for isolating emotion words from a pool that contains some words that do not denote emotions.
 Furthermore, we have separated two kinds of emotion words, those that seem to denote emotions exclusively, and those (hybrids) that also denote traits.
 We consider this to be a potentially Important distinction.
 The results of multidimensional scaling studies, for example, in which subjects make similarity judgments can be muddied by the unwitting inclusion of a subset of ambiguous stimuli (i.
e.
 hybrids).
 Words not denoting emotions or traits There may be occasions on which one might want to compare emotion words to some other kinds of words, say, cognitivestate words, or otheraction words.
 Although of secondary interest to us, the same kind of procedures can be used to separate the three kinds of words appearing in the other half of the initial pool, namely the half comprising words that passed Test 1 (see Fig.
 2 ) .
 The first kind of words that we attempt to isolate are those that do not represent an internal state of a person at all.
 These we call "otheraction" words because they characterize the actions (or the attitudes) of others that are relevant to (although not necessarily directed towards) the self.
 Perhaps because they are so strongly associated with emotional responses many otheraction words have found their way into lists of emotions and traits.
 For example, the word abandoned appears in the lists of Dahl and Stengel (1978) and o'f Bush (1973).
 It also appears in the Personal Traits column of Allport and Odbert's (1936) list.
 However, in modern English abandoned designates neither a trait nor an emotion.
 One cannot be disposed to behave "abandonedly", (although we do speak of behaving "with gay abandon" meaning wrecklessly), and one does not experience "being abandoned" as <i separate emotion.
 Rather, abandoned represents the actions of some other vis a vis the self.
 Its special quality, its emotional loading, presumably comes from the fact that the knowledge that one has been abandoned typically gives rise to (negatively toned) emotions.
 It is, however, as much of an error to assume that "abandoned" is an emotion or a trait as it would be to suppose that "kicked in the groin" was.
 We shall assume that unlike emotion words, the most salient characteristic of otheraction words is that others can engage in those actions without Che person to whom they are relevant necessarily being aware of them.
 Since one can be abandoned and not know it, abandoned cannot represent an emotion or any other kind of Internal state; it is an otheraction word.
 Notice that it does not follow from this that awareness entails an emotional state.
 Normally, awareness is a necessary but not sufficient condition for an emotion.
 Thus, Test 4 is designed to identify otheraction words.
 The logic of the test is (a) to deny awareness by using the expression "totally unaware", and (b) to take advantage of the fact that "otheraction words" require actions b^ others that might influence the self by explicitly making the agent of the action an other.
 Test 4: John was totally unaware that he had been xxxxx by the woman For this sentence frame reasonable completions are restricted to words that denote the actions (physical or mental) of others.
 As with the earlier tests, some words will fall to fit simply because they are of the wrong syntactic type, but, as always, the more interesting cases are those for which the resulting sentence is not syntactically illformed but 92 TEST 1 See Fig.
 1 APPRECIATED NEGLECTED TIRED DROWSY BORED INTERESTED OTHER BODYSTATES COGNITIVEACTIONS " STATES TEST i) TEST 5 PASS BORED INTERESTED DROWSY TIRED COGNITIVESTATES BODYSTATES Figure 2.
 OTHERACTIONS rather Is semantlcally anomalous.
 For example, the word puzzled does not fit very well because It Is odd to suppose that John could be puzzled and not realize it.
 We think that puzzled fits better Into the category that we call "cognitivestate'' words.
 A more difficult example is revived.
 Because revived suggests the poaslblllty of prior unconsciousness It seems better able to fit Into the sentence frame, yet we like to think that revived Is a bodystate word.
 If this is so, then subjects should Judge It to fit better in the bodystate frame (see Test 5, below), even though it might do tolerably well in the otheraction frame.
 Since subjects are asked to Judge how well a target word fits in a frame, it would be sufficient for our purposes to discover that words like abandoned and Ignored fit better than words like revived.
 It is not necessary that words not in the category upon which we are focussing give rise to seriously anomalous sentences.
 Our expectation is only that the most reasonable completions are produced by otheraction words.
 Internal state words make poor completions.
 Thus, we can separate otheraction words using this test.
 When subjects in our experiments are Instructed to make meanlngfulness Judgments they are warned to ignore one particular interpretation of the sentenceframe In Test 4 that would confound the results by rendering spurious "meaningful" Judgments.
 Subjects are told that the focus of the sentence should be on John's lack of awareness, not on the identity of the agent responsible for the action.
 Thus, they are instructed to ignore the interpretation in which John might have wrongly attributed his being ignored, appreciated, revived etc.
 to someone other than the woman.
 The following are examples of words that we think pass Test 4 most easily.
 Otheraction words: abused abandoned appreciated defeated disgraced ignored neglected slighted welcome It is worth pointing out a couple of things at this Juncture.
 The first concerns the difference between "being" and "feeling" something.
 The inclination to treat otheraction words as internal state words is much greater when they occur with "feel" than with "is".
 The reason is that "feel" can be, and often is interpreted to mean "feel as one would If (one realized that) one was xxxxx".
 Thus, that John was Ignored entails nothing about what John felt.
 It merely asserts that somebody ignored John.
 Whether or not John responded to this otheraction emotionally will depend on all kinds of factors (e.
g.
 Was he aware of the fact? Did he expect anything else? Did he care? etc.
) In other words, the Inference to an emotional response Is a pragmatic one, not a logical one.
 Yet, If one says that "John felt Ignored", we have much more license to infer that John was In an (emotional) internal state.
 We infer that John responded emotionally.
 There is no doubt that feeling ignored is a unique kind of (negative) feeling—so too is the feeling of being pricked by a needle.
 But this fact Is not sufficient for It to 93 count as an emotion.
 One cannot confuse their highly correlated effects.
 causes with The second point pertains to the problem of ambiguity.
 Consider the word encouraged.
 There certainly is an otheraction sense of the word.
 For example, someone might not realize that they were being encouraged to get hooked on drugs by the person that kept giving him free samples.
 But there is also another sense of the word in which one can be encouraged, namely the sense In which one becomes more optimistic about something or other, and In this sense the actions of an other are by no means necessary.
 So, for example, a person might be encouraged about the prospects of a good day's sailing on waking up and seeing the sun shining and feeling a fine breeze.
 Words like encouraged and relieved seem to have both an otheraction sense, and an emotion sense.
 It is our expectation (but only the data will tell) that where such words have an emotional sense, that sense is more salient.
 If this is the case, they will fail Test 1 and will be treated in the emotion and trait pool.
 This we consider more important than that they survive for treatment in the pool presently under consideration (i.
e.
 that part of the initial pool not denoting emotions or traits).
 This particular kind of crosspool ambiguity would only become a problem if a significant number of emotions were lost, an outcome that we consider unlikely.
 Our final test is designed to separate out bodystate words.
 These are terms that pertain to the physical state of an animate being—they are not restricted to humans, although some of them might be used more frequently with respect to humans.
 Again, these words can be valenced, and are often, but by no means necessarily, associated with emotional responses.
 Their appearance in various lists of emotion words (e.
g.
, again, those of Dahl & Stengel, and of Bush, and of Russell) is probably due to the fact that they appear in (Column II of) the Allport and Odbert (1936) list.
 This category is loosely characterized by these authors as "terms designating mood, emotional activity, or causal and temporary forms of conduct" (p.
vll).
 In it appear words like thirsty and breathless which in our opinion do not fit even this loose characterization.
 What is it to be in a thirsty mood? Is being thirsty an emotional activity, or a form of conduct? We suspect that these terms appear in Column II not because they belong there, but because they are less Incongruous there than in one of the other three categories used by Allport and Odbert.
 Test 5 attempts to separate out these terms by using a sentence frame that focuses on body states (as opposed to other kinds of sensations, or perceptions), and that minimizes the cognitive content by predicating them of a newborn infant: Test 5: The pediatrician explained that one of the physical characteristics of a newborn infant was to be xxxxx.
 It seems to us that this test only allows as good completions terms that designate body feelings.
 It seems to us to more readily allow completions with words that do not entail awareness and that do not suggest cognitive activity (emotional or otherwise).
 Thus it would be odd to complete this frame with an otheraction word like ignored, and it would be odd with words like certain.
 The oddness arises both from attempting to predicate higher level cognitive functions involving social awareness and metacognition to newborn infants, and from the fact that these predicates do not refer to physical characteristics.
 Examples of words which would pass this test with relative ease are: Bodystate words: breathless dizzy drowsy fatigued feverish ill itchy nauseous thirsty revived refreshed satiated Finally, It is our hope, and again we shall have to wait until the data are in, that those words that do not fit well the sentence frame for either Test 4 or Test 5, fall to do so because they are poor examples of otheraction words and of bodystate words.
 In that case It Is our expectation that they will be good examples of cognitivestate words such as the following: Cognitivestate words: bored disbelieving distracted doubtful overworked puzzled uncertain uninspired amused aware certain impressed interested sure vindicated Conclusion The question of the psychological validity of the various categories that we have proposed is obviously an important issue.
 We find these categories to be intuitively reasonable and we believe that they do represent psychologically important distinctions.
 However, ultimately we would like to know that these distinctions correlate with behavioral differences.
 For example, in a pilot study conducted by Lord and Ortony memory for emotion words was found to be very much superior to memory for cognitivestate words.
 These are the kind of data that one needs to demonstrate the psychological validity of the distinctions we have proposed.
 Finally, we should point out that we are more wedded to the general principles that we have proposed than we are to the specific tests.
 Indeed, some of the tests we find rather inelegant.
 It remains to be seen how effective these tests are, and we are convinced that there is room for considerable Improvement.
 However, some procedure along the lines of the one we have suggested seems essential if one is to avoid the kinds of problems in the analysis of 94 enotlons that we Identified at the outset.
 We hope that our discussion will alert those who are studying the emotions to the need to distinguish between states that genuinely are emotional in nature and those that are not.
 References Allport, G.
 W.
, & Odbert, H.
 S.
 Traitnames: A psycholexical study.
 Psychological Monographs, 1936.
 47(1, Whole No.
 211).
 Anderson, N.
 H.
 Lllceableness ratings of 55 personalitytrait words.
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1968, £, 272279, Bush, L.
 E.
 Empirical selection of adjectives denoting feelings.
 JSAS Catalog of Selected Documents in Psychology, 1972, 2̂ , 67.
 Dahl, H.
, & Stengel, B.
 A classification of emotion words: A modification and partial test of de Rivera's Decision Theory of Emotions.
 Psychoanalysis and Contemporary Thought, 1978, 1_, 269312.
 Davltz, J.
 The language of emotion.
 New York: Academic Press, 1969.
 Rosch, E.
 Principles of categorization.
 In E.
 Rosch (Ed.
), Cognition and categorization.
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
 : Erlbaum, 1978.
 Rosch, E.
, & Mervls, C.
 B.
 Family resemblances: Studies in the Internal structure of categories.
 Cognitive Psychology, 1975, 7̂ , 573605.
 Russell, J.
 A.
 A clrcumplex model of affect.
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1980, 39, U611178.
 Acknowledgements We would like to thank Charles Lord and George Miller for helpful comments on earlier drafts of the paper.
 The research reported herein was supported in part by the National Institute of Education under Contract No.
 HEWNIEC400760116, and In part by a Spencer Fellowship awarded to the first author by the National Academy of Education.
 95 Affect amd the Perception of Risk Amos Tversky and Eric J, Johnson Stanford University As cognitive scientists turn their attention to emotion, they face the task of integrating affect into models of cognition.
 The perception of risks seems an ideal area to examine the relationship between cognitive and affective processes.
 When we witness an accident, or read a newspaper story about a natural disaster, we do more than simply revise our subjective probabilities.
 We are often quite disturbed and shaken by such events.
 Our encounters with risk are inevitably connected with feelings, including those of surprise, dismay, and worry.
 Previous work in risk perception has concentrated on the cognitive domain.
 Lichtenstein et al.
 (1978), for example have asked people to estimate the frequency of death due to various causes.
 They argue that the availability of instances in memory helps determine these perceived frequencies.
 Thus, homicide is seen as much more common than suicide, although actually the reverse is true.
 Causes of death which are spectacular and the subject of media coverage appear to be overestimated while more mundane causes are underestimated.
 We conducted three studies using an experimental paradigm similar to the one used by Lichtenstein et al.
 Before they made their estimates, however, subjects read a newspaperlike account of the death of a single individual under the guise of a newspaper reporting study.
 These stories, although quite graphic, were relatively devoid of information.
 They were, however, effective in changing mood, causing readers to report they felt much more depressed than a control group which had not read the stories.
 Later, in an apparently unrelated questionnaire, these subjects were asked to estimate the frequency of death due to various causes.
 The causes of death ranged from those closely related to the topic of the story, such as stomach and lung cancer for a story about leukemia, to unrelated causes such as tornados and airplane accidents.
 The potential impact of these stories, and their accompanying changes in mood, represent a continuum.
 At one end of the continuum, we might expect the story to have no effect on the estimates.
 This is the normatively justified response, since the stories contained no information about the frequency of the death in the population.
 In contrast, the reader of the story might generalize from the instance in the newspaperlike story and increase their estimate of the frequency of that cause of death.
 We will term this a local generalization.
 The impact of the story might also generalize to other, related risks.
 A story about a leukemia victim might also raise our subjective probability of related diseases such as lung and stomach cancer, but not unrelated risks such as airplane accidents.
 This gradient generalization should be closely related to the similarity of the risks.
 Finally there is abundant evidence in social psychology (Isen, Shalker, Clark, and Karp 1978) for more pervasive Influences of affect.
 We might expect that increases in estimated frequency might occur for all risks, a possiblity we term global generalization.
 In the first two studies we examined the generalization of negative affect across the responses.
 Despite our attempts to provide a sensitive test of local or gradient generalization, both studies demonstrate sizable global generalization.
 Readers of the newspaper stories estimated that all causes of death were about 40% more common than the control.
 Since the changes were unrelated to the topic of the story.
 these data suggested that the effect was due to mood induced, and that the bad moods were more than unpleasant states.
 In addition, they had pervasive influences on an important class of riskrelated judgments.
 In the third experiment, we broadened the estimates we requested to include items not related to either death or risk.
 For example, subjects were asked to report the frequency of bankruptcy and divorce.
 Even with these widely divergent estimates, we have found strong global generalization of affect, with no evidence for either local or gradient generalization.
 We also included a condition which read an additional newspaper story free of risk related content, but which described a series of negative events which occurred to the main character.
 Since the story made no reference to risk or death, its principle effect was the negative mood it induced in the reader.
 This depressing story resulted in a pattern of results almost identical to those induced by the riskrelated newspaper stories.
 These data, viewed as a whole, demonstrate that affect can have a large and pervasive influence on one important class of judgments, estimates of the frequency of riskrelated events in the population.
 So far we have found no indication of a connection between the information contained in a story and its impact on the estimated frequency of death.
 The overriding factor in these increases does not appear to be the story told, but rather the mood or affect state it conveys to the reader.
 These effects are not limited to areas of death, but have been shown for estimates of nonfatal hazards and lifestyle threatening risks such as divorce and bankruptcy.
 Any model of affect must account for two important aspects of this phenomenon: (1) Induction of a negative mood alone is sufficient to change estimates, and (2) the size of the change is unrelated to the semantic similarity, either among the estimates themselves, or between the cause of the mood and the estimates.
 References Isen, A.
 M.
, Shalker, T.
E.
, Clark, M.
 & Karp, L.
 "Affect, accessibility of material in memory, and behavior: A cognitive loop?".
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1978, 37, 1lA.
 96 S Y M P O S I U M M E N T A L M O D E L S O F P H Y S I C A L P H E N O M E N A Generative Analogies as Mental Models Dedre Gentner Subject explaining electric current: If you increase resistance In the circuit, the current slows down.
 Now that's like a h1ghcars on a highway where youif you notice as you close down a lane, you have cars moving along.
 Okay, as you go down into the thing, the cars move slower through that narrow point.
 When people are reasoning about an unfamiliar domain, they often appear to use analogies, as In the above example from a protocol.
 Analogies are also used in teaching, as in the following excerpt: The idea that electricity flows as water does is a good analogy.
 Picture the wires as pipes carrying water (electrons).
 Your wall plug is a highpressure source which you can tap simply by inserting a plug.
 The plug has two prongsone to take the flow to the lamp, radio, or air conditioner, the second to conduct the flow back to the wall.
 A valve (switch) is usad to start or stop flow.
 If implicit or explicit analogies are an important determinant of the way people think about complex systems, then it becomes crucial to know exactly how such analogies work.
 This paper considers the psychological role of these analogies In structuring the target domain.
 The first question that must be posed is whether such seeming analogical models do in fact strongly affect the person's conceptualization of the target domain (the Generative Analogy hypothesis), or whether they are merely convenient ways of talking about the domain (the Mere Terminology hypothesis).
 The mere use of terms borrowed from a given domainas, for example, when electricity is discussed in terms of moving vehicles or flowing water1s not in Itself proof that the speaker is conceiving of electricity as deeply analogous to traffic or to water flow.
 To dem.
onstrate that an analogy has generative conceptual power, we must show that nontrivlal inferences specific to the base occur in the target.
 These inferences must be such that they cannot be attributed to shallow lexical associations; e.
g.
 it is not enough to find that the person who speaks of electricity as "flowing" also uses terms such as "capacity" or ''pressure".
 Such usage Is certainly suggestive of a Generative Analogy, but it could also occur under the Mere Terminology hypothesis.
 The goal here is to show that, at least some of the time, the Generative Analogy hypothesis holds: that deep, indirect inferences in the target follow from use of a given base domain as an analogical model.
 To do this, we must first decide what inferences should follow from use of a given analogy, and then observe whether the analogies people adopt appear to affect the set of inferences they readily make.
 The plan of this paper is (1) to propose a structuremapping theory of analogy that will allow us This research was supported by the Office of Naval Research and was carried out at Bolt Beranek and Newman and at U.
C.
S.
D.
 Donald Gentner collaborated on all aspects of this work, but particularly in developing the two analogical models of electricity.
 I thank Allan Collins, Ken Forbus, Ed Smith and Al Stevens for many insightful comments on this research.
 Please address correspondence to Dedre Gentner, Bolt Beranek & Newman, 50 Moulton Street, Cambridge, MA 02138.
 to predict the set of inferences that should follow from use of a given analogy; (2) contrast two analogical models for the domain and show that they lead to different indirect Inferences; (3) to show that people's inferences concerning simple circuits vary according to which of these models they use; and finally (4) to discuss the general issue of analogical models and structuremapping.
 A structuremapping theory of analogy.
 The claim here is that analogies select certain aspects of existing knowledge, and that this selected knowledge can be structurally characterized.
 First, let's consider what an analogy Is not.
 An analogy such as (1) An electric circuit with a battery and resistor much like a plumbing system with a reservoir and a constricted section of pipe.
 clearly does not convey that alj_ of one's knowledge about the plumbing system should be attributed to the circuit.
 The inheritance of characteristics is only partial.
 This might suggest that an analogy is a weak similarity statement, conveying that some but not all of the characteristics of the base system apply to the target system.
 But this weak characterization fails to capture the distinction between literal similarity and analogical relatedness.
 Contrast statement (1) with a literal similarity statement like (2) A hose is like a pipe.
 The literal similarity statement (2) conveys that the pipe and the hose share object attributese.
g.
 cylindrical shapeas well as sharing similar relationships with other objectse.
g.
 CONVEY (hose, water)/C0NVEY (pipe, water).
 Statement (1) also conveys considerable overlap in functional relations: e.
g.
 impede (resistor, current /IMPEDE (constriction, water).
 However, it does not convey overlap of objects and their attributes.
 The resistor as a separate object need not have any qualities in common with^constriction.
 The analogy, in short, conveys overlap in the system of relations among objects, but no particular overlap in the characteristics of the objects themselves.
 The literal similarity statement conveys overlap both in relations among the objects and in the attributes of the individual objects.
 The analogical models used in science can be characterized as structuremappings between complex systems.
 In these analogies, the objects of the known domain, the base domain, are mapped onto the objects of the domain of inquiry, the target domain; the predicates of the base domainparticularly the relations that hold among the nodesare then applied in the target domain.
 Structuremapping analogy asserts that identical operations and relationships hold among nonidentical things.
 The relational structure is preserved, but not the objects.
 Given a particular prepositional representation of knowledge we can proceed with an explicit characterization of analogical mapping.
 A structuremapping analogy between a target system T and a base system B 97 is an assertion that 1.
 Given a decomposition of the base and target domains into object nodes b,,b.
,.
.
.
,b of the base system B and object nodes t,,t„,.
.
.
,t 1 ^ HI of the target system T, 2.
 The analogical mapping M maps the nodes of B M:b.
 t.
 into the nodes of T.
 3.
 Then predicates valid in B can be applied in T, using the node substitutions dictated by the mapping: M : CHb.
,h.
)J ^CHt.
,t.
)J Further, the probability that the derived proposition is valid in the target T is greater for relational predicates than for attributes, and greater for highorder relations than for lowerorder relations.
 The strength of the analogical predication increases as we move down the list.
 (i) M:A(b.
) A(t.
) (ii) ̂ :CHb^,b.
)J )Z:F(t.
 .
t^) J {iii)M:£G{Fj(b.
,bj), F^{b.
,h.
)J —^ £G(F^(t.
,tj), F^{t.
,t.
)J Thus, TRUE ZrA(b.
)J does not strongly suggest TRUE £"A(t.
)7.
 Attributional predicates (i) are less likely to carry over than relational predicates (ii); and lowerorder relations less likely than higherorder relations (iii).
 Two models of simple electric circuits.
 One common analogy used to teach simple electricity is based on plumbing systems.
 Figure 1 shows the structuremapping conveyed by this analogy.
 The objectnodes of the hydraulic base domain (e.
g.
 the reservoir and constriction) are mapped onto the objectnodes (the battery and resistor) of the circuit.
 Given this correspondence of nodes, the analogy conveys that the relationships that hold between the objects and objectattributes of the hydraulic system also hold between the nodes of the electric system.
for example, that current increases with voltage just as rate of water flow increases with pressure; and that current decreases with resistance just as the rate of water flow decreases with degree of constriction.
 A second kind of analogy for electric circuits is based on objects moving through chutes.
 Current is seen as a moving crowd of small objects: voltage is the forward pressure or pushiness of the objects.
 Like the plumbing model, the movingobject model provides relations that map usefully into the electrical system: If we imagine a source of pushiness corresponding to the battery, and gates in the chute corresponding to the resistors, then the more pushiness, the higher the rate of aggregate motion; the narrower the gates, the lower the rate of aggregate motion.
 Although these two analogies convey many of the same relations, in some respects they differ in the aptness of the relational match with the target domain, particularly if we consider slightly more complex circuits (see Gentner and Genti""" in press.
) ing analogy is particularly apt for combinations of batteries, while the movingobject model is superior for combinations of resistors.
 Figure 1 Structural representations of water flow and of simple electric circuit, showing structural overlap SIMPLE CIRCUIT ; s VOLTAGE ACROSS CURRENT THROUGH, RESISTANCE OF battery wirel electricity Tjjtesistor wire2 \ / \ J^\^ I CONNECTED CONNECTED"^ CONNECTED CONNECTED TO TO TO TO r WATER SYSTEM ; ^ PRESSURE ACROSS 1 '̂  FLOW THROUGH NARROWNESS OF reservoir pipel water constriction pipe2 ^ \ / \ y \^ I CONNECTED CONNECTED CONNECTED CONNECTED TO TO TO TO 1 f Combinational problems.
 One way to observe deep indirect inferences in the target domain is to ask about different combinations of components.
 For example, we can ask how the current in a circuit with two resistors in series or in parallel compares with that in a simple oneresistor circuit.
 The answers are not obvious.
 The four circuits generated by series and parallel combinations of batteries and resistors are nontransparent.
 They provide an excellent way to observe true inferences, as opposed to shallow verbal associations.
 To deduce the current in these four circuits, the person must move beyond the firststage naive model of circuitry (shown in Figure 1).
 This first level of insight is that batteries make for more current, resistors make for less current.
 These rules hold for batteries and resistors in series, but not for parallel combinations, as shown in Figure 2.
 Parallel batteries give the same current as a single system, not more; while parallel resistors allow more current than in a simple circuit, not less.
 98 Figure 2 , Current and voltage in simple serial and parallel configuration circuits.
 SIHTLE ciBcurr ctjiuieirr At X I VOLTASC At S V SERIAL BATTERIES 1 2V paralij:l Batteries y SERIAI.
 RTSISTORS PARALLEL RESISTORS t : ? ' 21 CROWD MODEL Again I have all these people coming along here.
 I have this big area here where people are milling around.
 I think it is crucial that I separate them though before they get to the gates .
 .
 .
 I can model the two gate system by just putting the two gates right into the arena just lilce that.
 So this is one possible model of the two gate system.
 There are two gates instead of one which seems to imply that the resistance would be half as great if there were only one gate for all those people.
 This protocol suggests that models do affect inferences.
 The following study tests this possibility more on a larger scale.
 In this study, fairly naive high school and college students were first shown a simple circuit with a battery and a resistor, and then asked to give qualitative solutions for the four combination circuits shown in Figure 2.
 They were asked to circle whether the current (and voltage) in each of the combination circuits would be greater than, equal to, or less than that of the simple batteryresistor circuit.
 After they gave their answers for all four combination circuits, they were asked to describe the way they thought about electricity.
 Then, for each of the four circuit problems, they were asked to circle whether they had thought about flowing fluid, moving objects, or some other way of conceiving of electricity.
 They were also asked questions about water, to be sure that they understood the base domain.
 Figure 3 shows a schematic diagram of parallel and serial resistors in the target and in the two base systems.
 Figure 3 SERIAL RESISTORS PARALLEL RESISTORS Do analogies make a difference.
 If subjects are really using their analogical models to understand electronics they should draw on their knowledge of combinational relations among the corresponding components in their respective base domains.
 Even though the complex circuit problems are couched purely in terms of electronics, we should see differences in subjects' predictions depending on which model they use.
 For example, here are two sections of a protocol of a subject trying to predict the current in a parallelresistor circuit.
 In the first section, she uses a hydraulics model with reservoirs for batteries, which was her initial model, and derives the wrong answer of less current.
 In the second section, she uses a crowd model suggested to her by the experimenter to derive the correct answer of more current: HYDRAULICS MODEL WITH RESERVOIR We started off as one pipe, but then we split into two.
 Now does that make any difference? I guess it seems to me that this does make a difference.
 So what we have here is one pipe, one sort of line coming off and then we let it go like that for a while.
 We let it split off.
 We have a different current in the splitoff section, and then we bring it back together.
 That's a whole different thing.
 That just functions as one big pipe of some obscure description.
 So you should not get as much current.
 O CD z: o z^J^ O CD z o iir "Wv ' s/\/̂rI Iu _ 99 Subject who used the fluid model should do well on the battery questions.
 This is because serial and parallel reservoirs combine in the same manner as serial and parallel batteries, and the combinational distinctions are spatially quite distinct in the water domain.
 Two equal reservoirs in series (one above the other) give more pressure and hence a greater rate of water flow than a single reservoir.
 However, since water pressure depends only on height, not on volume, two reservoirs in parallel (side by side) yield only a rate of flow equal to that of a single reservoir.
 Thus, if the flowing fluid analogy is generative, then subjects with this model (assuming they know the way pressure works in the base) should be able to differentiate serial and parallel configurations of batteries.
 For resistors, however, the fluid flow model with its constrictions should not, in general, lead to a strong differentiation between serial and parallel resistors.
 As the protocol above shows, the different between serial and parallel constrictions is fairly opaque in the fluid flow domain; therefore subjects with this model cannot import the correct combinational distinction into the electricity domain.
 Thus, the prediction is that subjects with the fluid flow model should do better with brtteries than with resistors.
 For subjects with the movingobjects model, the pattern should be quite different.
 In this model, configurations of batteries should be relatively difficult to differentiate, since analogies for batteries are hard to find.
 In contrast, resistors should be better understood.
 This is because in the movingobjects model, resistors are often seen as gates.
 Conceiving of resistors as gates should lead to better differentiation between the parallel and serial configurations.
 If all the objects must pass through two gates one after the other (serial) then the rate of flow should be lower than for just one gate.
 On the other hand, if the flow splits and moves through two parallel gates, then the rate of flow should be twice the rate for a single gate.
 Thus subjects using this model should correctly respond that parallel resistors give more current than a single resistor; and serial resistors, less.
 Overall, if these models are truly generative analogies, we should find that the fluidflow people do better with batteries than resistors, and the movingobject people do better with resistors than with batteries.
 Results.
 Figure 4 shows the results for subjects who used either the fluidflow analogy or the movingobjects analogy consistently, on all four problems.
 For the fluidflow subjects, only those who correctly answered the latter questions about the behavior of reservoirs were included.
 This was to insure that subjects possessed the requisite knowledge in the base domain.
 There were nine fluidflow subjects and seven movingobject subjects.
 The patterns of combinational inference are different depending on which model the subject had.
 As predicted, people who used the fluidflow model performed better on batteries than on resistors.
 The reverse is true for the movingobject people.
 In a Model type x Component type x Topology analysis of variance, the interaction between model type and circuit component is significant; ¥{i,is} ='i(i; p < .
05 .
 Conclusions.
 The results of the study indicate that, for our subjects, the analogies used for electricity were truly generative.
 Use of different analogies led to systematic differences in the patterns of correct and incorrect inferences in the target domain.
 Moreover, these combinatorial differences are not easily attributable to shallow verbal associations and communicative patterns.
 These analogies seem to be truly generative for our subjects; structural reFlgure I* Proportion correct on different Itinds of circuits for subjects using different modeis of electricity C U R R E N T MTB) ̂ CCEL 1.
0 5 .
6.
 f M .
2 BAHERIES RESISTORS SERIAL PAWLLEL imiHb OBJECTS MDDEL 1.
0 .
6.
 S .
2 RESISTORS BATTIRIcS SERIAL PARALLEL lations from the base domain are mapped into the target domain, where they genuinely affect the person's conceptual view of the domain.
 The structuremapping interpretation of the process avoids two extreme positions that often arise in discussions of analogy as explanation: the "vague metaphoricizing" position, which holds that analogy is inherently illogical and unhelpful, and the "appropriate abstractions" position, which emphasizes the fact that analogies convey correct knowledge about the target domain.
 The structuremapping view is neutral with respect to whether analogy per se is helpful or harmful.
 According to the structuremapping view, the inferences conveyed by a given analogy are not necessarily either correct or incorrect; they are predictable from the predicate structure in the two domains.
 Relational predicates, particularly those that participate in higherorder systems of relations, are most likely to be mapped; but these may be either correct (as in the case of the movingobject model applied to parallel resistors) or incorrect or indeterminant (as when the movingobject model is applied to batteries).
 The more we know about the structure of analogy, the better we can design good educational analogies and predict the problem that will occur in use of any given analogy.
 References Centner, D„ and Centner, D.
R, Flowing waters or teeming crowds: Mental models of electric circuits.
 In D, Centner £• A.
 Stevens (Eds.
) Mental models.
 Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence ErIbaum Associates in press.
 100 T H E ROLE OF EXPERIENCE IN M O D E L S OF T H E PHYSICAL W O R L D Andrea A.
 diSeua MIT.
 DS.
R.
E.
 Cambridge, M A Jul7 8,1981 In recent years there has been a growing body of research dealing with "naive physics:" what people, prior to extensive Instruction, expect are the principles governing the everyday workings of the physical world.
 This research Is extremely interesting as a study of untutored learning since presumably whatever systematic understanding physicsnaive Individuals arrive at must be due primarily to their direct experience with the physica,̂  world.
 Here we would like to summarize briefly some results o1 that experimental work and a tentative theoretical Interpretation ol it.
 Then we will be in a position to speculate on the general natur< of the models people make of their experience in order to cope wit! it W h a t has emerged from naive physics research Is i surprisingly robust and systematic set of ideas about mechanic which are often, however, decidedly nonNewtonian.
 Studies fron age 10 upward to university students and physicsnaive adults hav given in many cases very uniform results (Viennot, 1979; Clemem 1979; McCloskey, el al.
 1980; White, 1981).
 In one study (diSess! 1981) w e let elementary school students and universlf undergraduates play with the same computer simulation of an obje< obeying Newton's Laws.
 Despite many more years experience, year of high school physics and a university level course o mechanics one could see a clear overlap in the set of strategies th university students used as compared to the elementary student Moreover, many of these common strategies were not neutral, m merely based on otherthantextbook analyses, but were overtly noi Newtonian The university students often had difnculty applylr the simplest classroom concepts to the simulation, even when aske One of the prominent expectations most students showed was th force acts by directly producing motion in the direction of the for rather than by combining with previous motion.
 Thus the: students sided with Aristotle against Newton.
 Besides the obvious pedagogical problems, data such as th pose In a very direct form the fundamental question of what o learns from experience.
 H o w can it be that people come to a robi nonNewtonian understanding, even resisting instruction, of a wor with which they deal everyday, a world governed by Newtoni principles? N o one expects the answers to such a question to be simp But some analysis of a set of naive conceptions (dISessa, to appe: suggests that something like the following mechanism may play Important role.
 It Is a mechanism concerning incremental learni based on experience.
 T h e basic Idea Is that a m o n g all t experiences one has regarding a class of phenomena, for exam| pushing and pulling things around, a few are selected to stand as prototypical for the class and are systematically used In both explanations and predictions It Is not, of course, a literal recall of an observed phenomenon which serves this purpose but what the person establishes as a conventional Interpretation of the phenomenon In terms which that person already understands I call these paradigmatic Interpretations of experience 'phenomenologlcal primitives.
" In the case of the Aristotelian expectation of motion always In the direction of force, one might hypothesize that the common event of pushlngan object from rest serves as an Important prototype.
 Thus the phenomenologlcal primitive here Is the "theory" that things simply move in the direction you push them, and previous momentum Is generally Ignored since It plays no role In the prototype.
 I suspect that the Interpretation of pushing from rest Is based on prior, commonsense notions of agency and causality which one finds associated with naive conceptions of force In many ways.
 Indeed, what is more surprising, one can make a rather strong case that these same ideas had a great impact on the historical development of the science of mechanics as well, (See diSessa, 1980) Though the notion of phenomenologlcal primitive might help account for the origins of false "theories" like the Aristotelian expectation, we must look to the knowledge system in which these structures operate in order to account for their long term stability.
 Here we can offer only the briefest suggestion as to the character of this system, again by example.
 The example involves a counterexample to the Aristotelian expectation.
 Imagine a tenton truck hurtling down the highway and a small push on Its side.
 W h o could believe the truck will move In the direction of the push? Indeed, no one does! W h e n subjects are prompted in such a way, the Aristotelian intuition Is not even considered, or.
 If It Is, excuses for its inapplicability are found: T h e force (sic) of the truck Is too big; It's overcoming the sideways push.
" But either way, (through selective cueing or maintaining excuses as part of the knowledge base) the Aristotelian expectation is Isolated and kept safe from refutation.
 W h a t generalizations can we draw from this story of naive physics about the models people spontaneously make? T h e first Is that these models are robust, that naive Ideas and the Interpretations of experience one makes with them can have a powerful effect on long term understanding or misunderstanding.
 All the evidence points to the conclusion that naive physics plays a large role In learning textbook physics.
 T o draw a caricature, it is almost as if one Is trying to teach physics to a stable cognitive system which already knows a different physics.
 T h e second generality is the Importance of knowing the particular preexisting notions What one carries away from an experience Is one's interpretation of it Such a truism only warrants attention when we remind ourselves of how little we know about the naive vocabulary and about how one builds deeper understanding out of it.
 T h e surprise of a Newtonian world teaching Aristotelian physics, however, should serve as a reminder.
 T h e third generality concerns the fragmentation exhibited by spontaneous models.
 O n e can find people both believing and 101 disbelieving their Aristotelian expectations depending on circumstances.
 This apparent Incoherence Is puiiling.
 After all, what other than a coherent system could exhibit such robustness.
 In fact.
 It Is in this area, coherence, that I believe our own naive Ideas about knowledge systems most need refining.
 References Clement, J.
 Common preconceptions and misconceptions as an important source of difficulty in physics courses, Amherst, M A : University of Massachusetts, Cognitive Development Project Working Paper, July.
 1979.
 diSessa, A.
 Unlearning Aristotelian physics: a study of knowledgebased learning.
 Cognttlxn Scltnce, to appear 1981 diSessa, A.
 Phenomenology and the evolution of Intuition, In Mental Modeli, Centner, D.
 and Stevens, A.
 (Eds.
), Lawrence Eribaum, to appear.
 diSessa, A.
 Momentum flow as an alternative perspective In elementary mechanics, (Working Paper *i), Cambridge M A : M I T D S R E , 1980 McCloskey, M .
 Caramazia, A and Green, B Curvilinear motion in the absence of external forces: naive beliefs about the motion of objects, Sciencf Vol.
 210, 5, December, 1980.
 Viennot, L.
 La ralsonnemini spontant en rfynomijue elemenlaire, Paris: Hermann, 1979.
 White, B.
 Designing computer games to enhance learning, (Technical Report) Cambridge, MA:.
 M I T AI Laboratory, 1981 102 THE FORM AND FUNCTION OF MENTAL MODELS P.
 N.
 JohnsonLaird Centre for Research on Perception and Cognition Laboratory of Experinental Psychology University of Sussex Brighton BNl 9QG England You are lost in the maze at Hampton Court Palace.
 You come to a turning and for a moment you are not sure which way to go.
 You recognize that you have been at this point before, and, in your imagination, you turn right, proceed down an alley, and are then confronted by a dead end.
 And so this time around, you decide to turn left.
 What you did was to reconstruct a route through the maze on the basis of a mental model of it.
 You may hardly have experienced any imagery at all; or you may have had a succession of vivid images like a snippet from an imaginary movie that culminates in a leafy culdesac.
 In either case, there was nothing verbal about your reasoning: you navigated your way through your model of the maze much as a rat in a psychological laboratory might have done (O'Keefe and Nadel, 1978).
 Yet, there is another method that you could use to make your decision.
 You recall instead that the way to get out of the maze is to keep turning left at every available opportunity, and, since you are presented with such an opportunity, you accordingly decide to turn left.
 This method makes use of a mental representation of verbal propositions.
 The two alternatives illustrate the contrast between exploiting a mental model (perhaps with accompanying imagery) and making use of a propositional representation.
 My aim in this paper is to show that the contrast is real  that there are both forms of mental representation  and to offer an account of the purpose that they serve.
 Indeed, if there are mental models, then the two most important questions about them are: what form do they take? what function do they serve? I will try to answer both questions.
 Direct empirical evidence for the contrast between propositional representations and mental models comes from a series of experiments that Kannan Mani and I have carried out (Mani and JohnsonLaird, in press).
 In the most recent of our studies, the subjects heard a verbal description of a spatial layout, such as: The spoon is to the left of the knife The plate is to the right of the knife The fork is in front of the spoon The cup is in front of the knife.
 They were then shown a diagram, such as: spoon knife plate fork cup and they had to decide whether or not the diagram was consistent with the description.
 (If you think of the diagram as depicting the arrangement of the objects on a table top, then obviously it is consistent with the description.
) Half the descriptions that the subjects received were determinate like the example above, and the other half were indeterminate.
 The indeterminate descriptions were constructed merely by changing the last word in the second sentence: The spoon is to the left of the knife The plate is to the right of the spoon The fork is in front of the spoon The cup is in front of the knife.
 This description is consistent with two radically different diagrams: (1) spoon knife plate (2) spoon plate knife fork cup fork cup The materials were counterbalanced so that for each set of five objects, a subject received either the determinate or else the indeterminate description.
 After the subjects had judged a series of eight descriptions and diagrams, they were given an unexpected test of their memory for the descriptions.
 On each trial, they had to rank four alternatives in terms of their resemblance to the original description: the original description, an inferrable description, and two "foils' with a different meaning.
 The inferrable description for the example above contained the sentence: The fork is to the left of the cup in place of the sentence interrelating the spoon and the knife.
 The description can therefore be inferred from the layout corresponding to the original description in the case of both the determinate and the indeterminate descriptions.
 The subjects remembered the layouts of the determinate descriptions very much better than those of the indeterminate descriptions.
 The percentages of trials on which they ranked the original and the inferrable descriptions prior to the foils was 88% for the determinate descriptions, but only 58% for the indeterminate descriptions.
 All twenty of the subjects conformed to the trend, and there was no effect of whether or not a diagram had been consistent with a description.
 However, the percentages of trials on which the original description was ranked higher than the inferrable description was 68% for the determinate descriptions, but 88% for the indeterminate descriptions.
 This difference was highly reliable, too.
 Evidently, subjects tend to remember the layout of determinate descriptions better than that of 103 indeterminate descriptions, but they tend to remember verbatim detail of indeterminate descriptions better than that of determinate descriptions.
 This 'crossover' effect is impossible to explain without postulating at least two sorts of mental representation.
 A plausible account of the results is indeed that subjects construct a mental model of the determinate descriptions but abandon such a representation in favour of a superficial propositional one as soon as they encounter an indeterminacy in a description.
 Mental models are easier to remember than propositional representations, perhaps because they are more structured and elaborated (cf.
 Craik and Tulving, 1975) and require a greater amount of processing to construct (cf.
 JohnsonLaird and BethellFox, 1978).
 But, models encode little or nothing of the linguistic form of the sentences on which they are based, and subjects accordingly confuse inferrable descriptions with the originals.
 Propositional representations are relatively hard to remember, but they do encode the linguistic form of sentences.
 Hence, when they are remembered, the subjects are likely to make a better than chance recognition of verbatim content.
 It is natural to suppose that propositional representations are produced as part of the normal process of comprehending discourse (cf.
 Kintsch, 1974; Fodor, Fodor, and Garrett, 1975), but they can also serve the useful purpose of providing an economical representation of radically indeterminate discourse.
 The function of mental models is profoundly semantic: a propositional representation is true or false with respect to a mental model of tFe worl?7 TfvTs relation is established by mapping propositional representations onto mental models, and I have argued elsewhere for a procedural semantics that carries out this task (see, e.
g.
 JohnsonLaird, 1980, for a description of a program that builds up spatial arrays from verbal descriptions).
 Truth or falsity with respect to reality ultimately depends on the construction of mental models on the basis of perceptual experience.
 There is one other crucial function served by mental models.
 The fundamental semantic principle of truth is that an assertion is true provided that there is no counterexample to it.
 The assertion, "Socrates is dead," has only one possible counterexample, namely, that Socrates is not dead; the assertion, "All men are mortal," has a large number of potential counterexamples.
 Likewise, given the truth of a set of premises, a conclusion is necessarily true only if there is no counterexample to it, that is, no way of interpreting the premises that renders the conclusion false.
 If human beings have grasped this principle, then they can reason validly without possessing any mental logic, rules of inference, or inferential schemata.
 It is a straightforward matter to write computer programs that make inferences without recourse to rules of inference: they construct models of the premises, draw a putative conclusion on the basis of a simple heuristic, and then search for counterexamples to the conclusion.
 On the previous occasion that I presented this idea (JohnsonLaird, 1980), it was viewed as on a par with the Pelagian heresy in some quarters.
 Yet cognitive scientists should be prepared to accept that the doctrine of mental logic may be just as mistaken as the idea of original sin.
 Abandoning the doctrine certainly solves the otherwise intractable mystery of how children could acquire logic without being able to reason validly.
 The thesis that logic is innate is the only plausible solution but it has no more explanatory value or empirical content than an appeal to divine intervention.
 If there is no mental logic.
 then the question of of its origins does not even arise.
 The theory of mental models also reveals the major cause of inferential error: the greater the number of mental models that have to be constructed in order to make a valid deduction, the greater load on working memory, and the more likely an error is to be made.
 My colleagues and I have checked this prediction in a variety of inferential tasks.
 Table 1 presents the relevant data from four of our experiments in which the subjects had to draw their own conclusions from syllogistic premises: it gives the percentages of valid conclusions that were drawn depending on the number of mental models that had to be Table 1 The percentages of correct valid conclusions drawn from syllogistic premises in four experiments.
 The percentages are shown as a function of the number of mental models that have to be constructed in order to draw a valid conclusion.
 Experiment 1 Experiment 2 Experiment 3 Experiment 4 One model problems 92 80 62 58 Two model problems 46 20 20 0 Three model problems 28 9 3 0 constructed.
 In Experiment 1, 20 students at Teachers College, Columbia University, were asked to state what followed from premises in each of the 64 logically distinct varieties (see JohnsonLaird and Steedman, 1978).
 Experiment 2 was a replication with 20 students at Milan University, and Experiment 3 was a further replication in which 20 Italian subjects were given just 10 seconds in which to make each of their responses.
 These experiments were carried out in collaboration with Bruno Sara.
 Finally, in Experiment 4, which Debbie Bull and I designed, 19 children between 11 and 12 years of age were asked to draw conclusions from 20 out of the 64 possible pairs of syllogistic premises.
 The trend in each experiment was remarkable: not a single subject that we have tested has ever failed to perform best on those syllogisms that require only a single model to be constructed.
 It is difficult to resist the conclusion that inferential ability is based on the manipulation of mental models.
 Let me finish with one final conjectural flourish.
 The psychological core of understanding any phenomenon consists in your having a 'working model' of it in your mind.
 If you understand inflation, a mathematical proof, the way a computer works,DNA or a divorce, then you have a mental representation of it that serves as a model in much the same way as, say, a clock functions as a model of the solar system.
 Like a clock, a mental model need not be wholly accurate to be useful, which is just as well because, of course, there are no complete models of any empirical phenomena.
 If a television set is mentally represented as containing a beam of electrons that are magnetically deflected across the screen, then this component of the model serves an explanatory function.
 It accounts, for example, for the distortion of the picture that occurs when a magnet is held near to the screen.
 Other components of the model may serve no such function.
 One might imagine, say, each electron as deflected by the magnetic field much as a ballbearing is diverted from its course by a magnet, but without having any representation of the nature of magnetism: the 'picture' is just a picture, which simulates reality rather than models its underlying principles.
 At least one other component of every dynamic model is 104 neither modelled nor simulated.
 This element is time.
 Time is not represented in a dynamic model, but rather the model unwinds in real time in much the same way as do the events that are modelled, though perhaps at a different rate.
 In models that are not dynamic, of course, time can be represented by a spatial axis.
 What one should expect in examining the growth of expertise in a particular domain is the gradual transition from mere prepositional principles to a fully articulated mental model, and the gradual replacement of simulated elements by their modelled counterparts.
 REFERENCES Craik, F.
I.
M.
, & Tulving, E.
 Depth of processing and the retention of words in episodic memory.
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 1975, 104, 268294.
 Fodor, J.
D.
, Fodor, J.
A.
, & Garrett, M.
F.
 The psychological unreality of semantic representations.
 Linguistic Inquiry, 1975, 4, 515531.
 JohnsonLaird, P.
N.
 Mental models in cognitive science.
 Cognitive Science, 1980, 4, 71115.
 JohnsonLaird, P.
N.
, & Bethel 1Fox, C.
E.
 Memory for questions and amount of processing.
 Memory and Cognition, 1978, £, 496501.
 JohnsonLaird, P.
N.
, & Steedman, M.
J.
 The psychology of syllogisms.
 Cognitive Psychology, 1978, 10, 6499.
 Kintsch, W.
 The representation of meaning in memory.
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1974.
 Mani, K.
, & JohnsonLaird, P.
N.
 The mental representation of spatial descriptions.
 Memory and Cognition, In press.
 O'Keefe, J.
, & Nadel, L.
 The hippocampus as a cognitive map.
 London: Oxford University Press, 1978.
 105 Learning Through Growth of Skill in Mental Modeling^ Jill H.
 Larkin Herbert A.
 Simon CarnegieMellon University The mental models of a skilled scientist, are often different from tfiose of an untrained person.
 For example, in tfiinking about the interaction of physical objects, the untrained person seems largely restricted to envisioning objects in a sequence of motions.
 The entities in these "naive" or Immediate mental models correspond directly to objects in the real v*/orld.
 The inferential rules that control the running of these models correspond roughly to rules reflecting h o w events unfold in real time.
 While such mental models are perfectly adequate for getting around in everyday situations, they are sometimes dramatically wrong (Green, McCloskey, and Caramazza, 1980, Clement, 1981) and they certainly seem less effective in solving scientific problems than are the more extended representations of the scientist.
 The mental models of a person with training in physics are not limited to entities and inferential rules based directly on experience.
 Instead, these models can and do include entities that have technical meanings defined only by the scientific discipline, and that are related by special inferential rules again defined in the discipline.
 For example, a person with training in physics is not restricted to considering perceivable objects like cats and coffee cups, but may also represent situations in terms of technical entities like forces or pressure drops.
 Similarly, capacity to make inferences about a situation need not parallel imagined development of the situation in time, but instead may reflect special constraint laws of physics, e.
g.
, that the m o m e n t um of an isolated system must remain constant.
 These ideas.
are discussed more fully in (Larkin, 1981a) and in the discussion of physical intuition in (Simon and Simon, 1978).
 In this paper w e consider how an individual might develop the ability to rerepresent situations in terms of scientific entities.
 Presumably this development is one goal of science instruction.
 W e shall present preliminary results from an experimental and theoretical case study in such development.
 Subjects with backgrounds in physics studied sections taken from a physics textbook that described material (fluid statics) they had not previously encountered, and then used this material in efforts to solve problems.
 In a coordinated theoretical effort w e are developing a computerimplemented model of learning from text that is capable of using declarative statements of facts (in this case, relations of physics) both to "understan'd" the derivation of new results and to apply these results in solving problems.
 1.
The A B L E system The system, called ABLE, is a descendant of a system that learned through practice to apply principles of mechanics, and that accounted for strategy differences between skilled and less skilled individuals (Larkin, 1981b).
 A B L E is a production system written in the current implementation of O P S .
 a LISPbased efficient production system language (Forgy, 1980, Forgy.
 1979).
 Thus A B L E has a working memory composed of passive elements of knowledge that are acted on by a large production memory composed of elements of procedural knowledge encoded as conditionaction pairs.
 W h e n the conditions of a particular production are found to match some of the contents of working memory, this match cues the execution of the corresponding actions which then act to modify working memory.
 Then the conditions of some new production are found to match, and the cycles continue.
 Production systems have a continued history of fruitlulness in psychological modeling (Newell and Simon, 1972, hJewell, 1973, McDermott, 1978) but the major feature used in ABLE is the easy modeling of learning.
 Each production is an independent piece of knowledge, and the circumstances under which it applies are determined Only by the contents of its own conditions.
 Thus the addition of knowledge (learning) is modeled simply by the addition of new productions.
 To explain the working of ABLE w e consider its application to solving part of the problem given in Table 1 and Figure la, and presented as a worked example in Halliday & Resnick (1970).
 The first paragraph of the example states the problem.
 W e currently give ABLE a good understanding of this paragraph, i.
e.
, a good immediate representation of the problem.
 It is coded as a set of related declarative elements in working memory, indicated by the graph structure in Figure lb.
 1.
1.
 Encoding ot Principles After achieving this immediate representation of the situation, how does a solver make scientific inferences of the kind illustrated by the textbook solution given in Table 1? In other words how is a scientific mental model run? Such inferences must be based on scientific principles that are in some sense "known" to the solver.
 "Known" might initially mean that the appropriate textbook page is available for inspection.
 W e discuss later the growth of other kinds of knowing.
 Thus we provide ABLE with knowledge of relevant principles in the form illustrated in Figure 2.
 Like all principles and definitions in ABLE, it includes a symbolic statement of the principle Ap pgh together with a setting to which the principle applies and in terms of which of the .
symbols in the statement are (Jefined, Here the selling includes a portion of liquid v/ith density p.
 two points in tlia: liquid sepaiated by a height Table 1: Worked example from a textbook (Halliday and Resnick, 1970) showing the application of relations of fluid statics to relate densities of liquids in a Ushaped tube.
 A Utube is partly filled with water.
 Another liquid, which does not mix with water, is poured into one side until it stands a distance d above the water level on the other side, which has meanwhile risen a distance I (Fig.
 la).
 Find the density of the liquid relative to that of water.
 In Fig.
 1 points C are at the same pressure^ Hence, the pressure drop from C to each surface is the same^, for each surface is at atmospheric pressure"' The pressure drop on the water side is p 21*, where the 21^ comes from the fact that the water column has risen a distance I on one side and fallen a distance I on the other side, from its initial position.
 The pressure drop on the other side is pg(d + 21)^, where p is the density of the unknown liquid.
 Hence, n8 p 021 = pg(d + 21)" and This work was supporled by NIE NSF grant number 1 5586?.
 by NSF grant number 1 55035 .
ind by the Dtlcnse Advanced Research Proiecls Agency (DOO).
 ARPA Otclrji No ,3597 monitof'.
*d by the Air Force Avronics Labor.
itnry under Contrjr.
t F;UGI57U C 1151 Tli.
> Jiiilhors ncknovvlfdoe llio rmpi.
rl.
int coirlrrbulrcins of f>u;.
.
'iri ('.
(tŴii m llu rrll.
 r li.
ji; h.
in'.
ciiplion .
in.
I codrnrj • ,1 Ihe pr.
jldrol iljt;i p/p^ 2l/(2Ud)9.
 The ratio of the density of substance to the density of water is called the relative density (or the specific gravity) of that substance.
 •̂̂  These numbers label inferences for reference later in the text.
 h.
 The "gravitational acceleration" g = 9.
8m/s is not specified but assumed to be known outside the context of this principle.
 This knowledge of a principle is encoded as a passive linknode structure involving no knowledge of hov,' or when to apply the principle In this sense it is dcclaraine knowledge, although clearly 106 Figu re 1: (a) Diagram provided by the textbook for the example In Table 1 (b) Annotated "diagram" (immediate representation) provided for ABLE in starting to work the example.
 (a) P8 Figure 3: Goals used in ABLE with labeled arrows indicating productions that change goals.
 Expression for a quantity Find principle .
 Establish principle P3 Compare prir P5 inciple P4 j Check established(b) P7 Recurse on nonmatched quantity Fail liquidtop watertop 9 water originallevel I •liquidbottom wjler tube connection Figure 2: Graph structure representation of the principle Ap = pgh.
 Setting: point A Statement: liquid ̂ t:;^ pressure dro>\_^^ ^^density \~.
^point B •Ap = pgh height it goes beyond minimal propositional encoding of the phrases that may have been used to describe it in the textboot̂ .
 To illustrate how ABLE uses this knowledge of principles, we consider its application to develop the inference labeled 4 in Table 1, that is to infer that the pressure drop from 0 to A on the water side of the tube is pg2l.
 1.
2.
 Interpretive Use of Principles ABLE applies declarative knowledge through general procedural knowledge that first matches the setting of the principle to the setting of the problem, and then uses the statement of the principle (interpreted in the setting of the problem) to make inferences.
 The control structure of ABLE, shown in Figure 3, is based on that proposed by Neves and Anderson (1981) for the analogous task of supplying reasons for the statements in a geometry proof.
 The following paragraphs provide English statements of the productions that control the shift of goals.
 Figure 3 indicates these productions by labeled arrows linking goal statements.
 ABLE starts by using the knowledge in production PI that if the goal is to find an expression for a quantity in a problem setting, then one should search for a principle that can provide further information about that quantity.
 The initial search can be based on a variety of criteria (cf.
 Simon & Simon (1978), Larkin 1981b ) .
 ABLE currently uses a very rough process, embodied in P2, that to be considered a principle must involve a quantity of the type currently desired (here pressure drop).
 ABLE then applies the knowledge in production P3 to set the goal of comparing elements of the problem situation with elements of the principle, including its statement and setting.
 Production P4 contains knowledge of how to trace and compare the graph structures representing the current problem situation (e.
g.
, Figure lb) and the principle situation (Figure 2).
 When all possible correspondences between the two graph structures have been matched, production P5 sets as a goal to check whether all parts of the principle have been matched.
 If they have, the goals are successively marked as succeeded.
 If this is not the case, production P6 recognizes that part of the situation crucial to the applicability of the principle has not been satisfied.
 The goals are then successively marked as failed, and ABLE ultimately must seek a different principle.
 If, however, the only part of the principle situation that does not have a correspondence in the problem situation is a particular theoretical entity (quantity) then production P7 recognizesthat if this correspondence could be established then the principle would succeed.
 Thus in our example, if ABLE had not already established the correspondence h = 21 (as the text solution has not  see Table 1), then ABLE would set as a subgoal to establish an expression for the height h, beginning work again with production PI in Figures.
 I^uch of ABLE's work involves establishing a detailed match between a principle setting and a subset of the problem setting.
 In the single inference discussed above, of the total of 9 cycles of production execution, 5 were concerned with matching settings.
 This costly and compulsive matching seems, however, to be necessary for good problem solving.
 For example, in the current problem there are several densities, pressures, and heights.
 Without careful matching between settings, the solver can easily "infer" relations between quantities that in fact have no connection.
 1.
3.
 Reducing the Costs of Interpretive Matching Because matching a principle to a setting is costly, it is crucial that a solver develop good search procedures for locating principles likely to produce useful inferences.
 The primitive search algorithm embodied in production PI (pick a principle involving the kind of quantity you're trying to solve for) is certainly not good enough.
 The 107 following paragraphs describe ABLE's ability to develop better search mechanisms.
 ABLE learns through two mechanisms proceduralization and generalization.
 The mechanisms implemented here are adapted from those described by Neves and Anderson (1981).
 Similar mechanisms have been implemented by (Newell, Shaw, & Simon , 1960, Lewis, 1978, Hayes and Simon, 1974).
 Proceduralization is a mechanism through which declarative knowledge (e.
g.
, the statement of a principle and a situation to which It applies) can, through application in an example, be converted to procedural knowledge of how to apply that principle to analogous situations.
 Composition is the collapsing or compiling of procedures so that they run more quickly and with reduced need for conscious monitoring (Hayes and Simon, 1974).
 In ABLE productions PI and P4 (Figure 3) contain the capacity for proceduralization.
 (These are the productions that use directly declarative knowledge of relations.
) W h e n each of these productions executes, it builds a copy of itself involving the specific declarative entities from the relation being applied.
 Thus for example, when P4 applies to the principle Ap pgh, it may apply in the form: IF If the goal is to compare a principle to the current setting and there are corresponding theoretical entities in the principle and problem settings and these entities refer to tv̂ o physical entities of the same type T H E N mark the two physical entities as corresponding.
 This production builds a copy of itself of the form: IF the goal is to compare the principle Ap = pgh to the cui rent setting and the density of a liquid in the problem setting corresponds to the density in the principle setting THEN mark this liquid in the problem as corresponding to the liquid in the principle Ap = pgh.
 This new production is part of the procedural knowledge needed to apply the principle Ap = pgh.
 As Neves and Anderson (1981) point out.
 these proceduralized productions are almost always shorter (contain fewer conditions) than the original general productions that built them.
 Thus they may immediately provide the advantage of reducing workingmemory load.
 However, their main importance is that they are the ingredients for building efficient productions that recognize useful configurations in a problem and relate these configurations to potentially useful principles.
 The second mechanism of learning is composition.
 If two proceduralized productions (any of those built by PI and P4) execute in sequence, they are combined to form a single production that does the work of both.
 This is done first by collecting the condition and action elements from both and deleting repetitions.
 (Further details given by Neves and Anderson (1981).
) For example, the proceduralized production above can be composed with a production built by PI in Figure 3 to form the following: IF the goal is to find an expression for Ap of a fluid and there is a density for the fluid T H E N set the goal to compare to the current situation the principle Ap = pgh with the correspondence between the pressure drops and the densities already established.
 Productions of this form, indicated by PS in Figure 3 short circuit the primitive search algorithm of PI.
 They do not, however, short circuit all the interpretive matching between the principle and problem settings.
 In the current case, ABLE must still match lines and points and heights.
 In human language the knowledge in a production like P8 might be expressed, "I have to relate pressure drops to density and I remember there was a principle about that, so let m e check whether it applies.
" Although such knowledge does not replace the use of a general ability to apply a principle in a situation, a collection of this kind of knowledge provides a means of locating principles that are likely to prove useful.
 Furthermore, as proceduralization and composition proceed, they build productions with more information in their conditions.
 Thus the ability to recognize a' configuration in which a certain principle will be useful becomes more and more accurate.
 In the limit, if ABLE has worked many similar problems, it builds productions like the following: IF the goal is to find or justify an expression for pressure drop and there is a density associated with a fluid and there are two points in the fluid separated by a height T H E N there is a pressure drop between the two points, and its value is Ap = pgh.
 At this point ABLE has at least one of the capabilities necessary for building what w e have called a scientific representation for a problem.
 On encoding a problem involving appropriate heights and densities, ABLE immediately knows that the problem also involves related pressure drops, and ban use these entities as readily as any in the immediate representations.
 1.
4.
 Settings for Learning W h e n can the learning involved in proceduralization and coinposit'cn occur? Clearly solving problems is one such setting.
 However, as vje sIkiM see in our dir;ussion of human learners, it seems likely that this learning also takes place during study of text material.
 The following is one mechanism through which this might occur.
 Consider the textbook example in Table 1.
 Suppose the learner considers the various inferences (labeled 19) as statements to be understood or verified on the basis of previous knowledge.
 Then understanding the sentence involving inference 4 involves exactly the process discussed above, justifying the expression for the pressure drops by using the principle Ap pgh.
 If such reasongiving is pait of active study of scientific text, then through reading the learner should acquire some ability to recognize situations to which principles will apply.
 These comments are not limited to the study of text examples.
 N e w principles themselves are presented in much the same manner.
 A setting is described, and a sequence of inferences are stated, ultimately leading to a statement of a new principle.
 2.
 Human Learners In previous work (Simon and Simon, 1978.
 Larkin, McDermott, Simon, and Simon, 1980a, Larkin, 1981b), w e have compared the problem solving of true experts, individuals with extensive professional experience in physics, with that of novices, individuals whose experience is limited to the equivalent of less than one college level course.
 The performance of the export subjects would correspond here to the ABLE model after all proceduralization and composition had occurred This very ABLE model is essentially equivalent in performance to the models of expert subjects described in earlier papers.
 Proceduralization and composition have produced a collection of sensitive productions that can recognize a configuration of knowledge in a problem situation, and make an iininetliate inference based on an appropriate principle.
 The hiim:in solvers considered here are all novices with respect to the phŷ ic:; i!i,il>.
ri,il.
 they know varyiny ;imounts of general physics.
 108 but none had previously studied fluid statics.
 The question is then to what extent do human learners, confronted with a novel section of physics text and associated problems, perform like the ABLE system? The 2tnswer is that in interesting ways human learners are more and less able.
 In this discussion w e shall focus on the performance of four subjects, two who look very much like the ABLE system and two who look very different.
 These data are preliminary and the support for features of the ABLE model is suggestive rather than conclusive.
 In individual sessions each subject was asked to talk aloud as much as possible while reading a sixpage discussion of fluid statics from a physics textbook (Halliday and Resnick, 1970) and working three associated problems.
 Subjects were given one and onehalf hours for the task, and were encouraged to work just as if they were completing an assignment for a science course.
 Table 2 summarizes the characteristics of subjects w e consider more and less able learners, characteristics w e discuss in the following paragraphs.
 2.
1.
 More Able Learners Reading W e have suggested in the preceding section that careful active reading of text may be an important setting for acquiring the partially proceduralized and composed productions that aid in locating useful principles.
 Indeed the two more able subjects used a great deal of effort in processing the text.
 First, both subjects began their work by reading the text completely from beginning to end, although both glanced at the problems before beginning to read.
 Second, these learners show consistent evidence that they are processing what they read carefully and conscientiously.
 The two subjects interrupted their reading 53 and 70 times respectively to make comments on what they were reading.
 Most of these comments (75%, 81%) suggest that the subject is relating what is Table 2: Characteristics of more and less able learners.
 More Able ' Reading: Aloud, many comments Reading precedes problem solving Slowly (e.
g.
,19min, 20min) Problem solving: Correct or factor of 2 error No search Order of principles like ABLE Less Able Often silently, usually few comments Problem solving before all text read Rapidly (e.
g.
,7min, 5min) Other errors Search c o m m o n Order of principles meansends being read to previous knowledge ("Ok, intuition would tell you that"; ".
.
.
which is analogous to just the weight of something in mechanics"), or expressions of understanding (e.
g.
, "Ok, that's easy enough").
 Problem Solving W e consider here performance on the following problem, which is very analogous to the worked example in the text (Table 1).
 A simple Utube contains mercury.
 When 13.
6 cm of water is poured into the right arm, how high does the mercury rise in the left arm from its initial position? The text provides the densities of water (1.
0 x 10"'kg/m'') and mercury (1.
36 x 10*kg/m^).
 The two subjects solved this problem without any search through Table 3: Order of major steps in solution to the U tube problem by (a) ABLE, (b) and (c) More able human solvers, (d) and (e) less able human solvers, (f) Text example.
 CM — U> II R n S ?= ̂   °.
 I l l S a a ^ < 3 it_ II ™ _• !5 E II ^ i» ^ =.
 + eg •o c S * * j o> s « ~ "̂  a = a <1 b II a _ < i Ol a 5 .
=.
  <D <0 ,'B 5 I a a" =• a =', E " II «• " a* 9 « & ^ i § « & ̂ ~ s I o I s e II ?) p _= 3 < a  S a jz a.
 S.
 (0 t I ° " O .
t II " r r I I o B 3 a < ,1 _«" " E to u =• a' » E " II «,;? —' a I M i l is «*5 " S3 5 E 11 5 °! '̂  II TO „ i i g 0) fi £ I s II«, a'2 ^ E 5 52 ̂  i ; i ; i ^ the text.
 They readily recalled the relevance of the Utube example, found the right page in the text, and based their solutions on inferences made in that example.
 Thus before beginning the problem solution, these subjects had some internalized knowledge of useful principles to apply to a Utube setting.
 The order in which principles are applied is similar to that generated by the ABLE system, and differs slightly from the order presented in the original example in that information is generated in a forward working manner so that information is always available at the time it is needed.
 These data are presented in Table 3.
 Part (f) of Table 3 shows the nine inferences, labeled 19 in Table 1, used by the textbook in solving the analogous problem stated in Table 1.
 The remaining solutions are for the problem solved by the human subjects.
 The two subjects considered here both solved this problem correctly.
 All of the subjects w e consider to be more able either solved this problem correctly or made the simple error of solving for the height of the original fluid (mercury) above the point C (Figure la), rather than solving for half that distance, the distance the mercury rose.
 2.
2.
 Less able Learners Reading Unlike ABLE and the more able solvers, the less able solvers skimmed through the text rapidly.
 The two considered here 109 complained that reading aloud interfered with understanding and were permitted to read the text silently, which they did rapidly (see Table 2), These subjects also both stopped reading and began solving the /irst problem as soon as they encountered material relevant to it.
 Problem Solving Unlike the more able subjects, the less able subjects do search through the text tor appropriate relations.
 As Table 3 shows, S3 and S4 each tried two different principles.
 In all cases the selection was preceded by an episode of searching the text material.
 As shown in Table 3 the order in which principles are applied by, the less able subjects is very different from that produced by the more able subjects, by the ABLE system, and in the analogous text example.
 The procedure of these subjects seems to be the following: (1) search through the text for an equation that involves distances (presumably because a distance is the quantity to be found).
 This equation may be the equation resulting from the U tube example (subject S3 in Table 3) but it may not be (subject 84).
 (2) Substitute values for quantities appearing in this equation, using as a criterion for substitution merely left over that the value substituted must be of the same type as the symbol for which it is substituted (i.
e.
.
 a height for a height, a density for a density).
 Indeed, even this simple constraint is sometimes violated when subjects fail to distinguish between pressure p and density p.
 (3) If after this substitution all values in the quantity have been used, and there is in the equation a quantity of the appropriate type (here distance) left over, then solve the equation if possible.
 (4) If it is impossible to fit all the information in the problem into the equation, then abandon it and get a new one (5) If there remain in the equation symbols not assigned values, then search either for an expression involving this symbol, or for some "standard" value for this symbol (e.
g.
, atmospheric pressure).
 This procedure is very different from that executed by ABLE.
 However, it is not hard to see how such performance might be prodi.
:ced by ABLE through appropriate delation of strategic knovjledge.
 First, one v.
ould have to use Iho initial ABLE system, before it had built any procedural knowledge about applying principles.
 This absence corresponds to the lack of processing of the text observed in these human solvers.
 Second, one would have to remove from ABLE its strategic knowledge that a principle can be applied only if all aspects of the setting of th.
it principle are matched against the setting of the problem (production P4 in Figure 3).
 This production would be replaced with one that would allow use of a relation if all symbols in it could be matched by quantities of the same type in the problem by quantities of the same type (i.
e.
, a length for a length).
 This uncritical matching perhaps is associated with the less able subjects poor abilities for selecting useful principles.
 They have to match a lot of principles, and so may do it in a less costly way.
 even though this economy has devastating effects on their problem solutions.
 With these changes the ABLE system could produce any of the incorrect solutions we have observed in the less able subjects.
 The result is a weak meansends procedure of searching for relevant principles observed elsewhere in novice solvers (Simon and Simon.
 1978, Larkin, fvlcDermott, Simon, and Simon, 1980b).
 A first principle is proposed because it contains a quantity of the type to be solved for.
 Subsequent principles are proposed because they .
 can be used to replace in the original equation quantities without known values.
 Substitution is based on the weak criterion that the two quantities must be of the same type (e.
g.
, two lengths, two pressures).
 Because of their uncritical matching of principles to the problem situation, the errors made by the less able subjects are varied and exotic compared to the simple "sensible" error characteristic of the more able subjects.
 The most common error is illustrated by subject S3 in Table 3.
 The equation from the Utubo example is used, the distance 136 cm is substituted for one of the distances in the • equation.
 / and rf, and the equation is solved' lor the remaining symbol for distance However, as illustrated by subject S4, the errors can be far more exotic.
 However, all errors are produced by copying some equation from the problem, substituting for the symbols in.
 that equation values that correspond in type, and then solving for a symbol for distance.
 3.
 Conclusion As we have noted elsewhere (Larkin, 1981a, Simon and Simon, 1978) individuals trained in physics seem to work with mental models that are different than those used by less trained individuals.
 In particular, skilled individuals rerepresent the problems in terms of technical entities (e.
g.
, pressure drops) that have no special meaning outside the discipline of physics.
 Here w e suggest that the general learning mechanisms of proceduralization and composition provide some explanation of how this ability to rerepresent problems might be acquired.
 Our prototype ABLE system acquires a principle in declarative form, as a student might by reading a chapter.
 This initial encoding does not itself include any information about how or where to apply the principle.
 Thus initial applications of the principle are interpretive: achieved through general procedural knowledge about how to apply any principle or definition.
 Through such application ABLE builds new specific procedural knowledge associated with the principle.
 Initially fragments of procedural knowledge aid in the search process.
 They contain patterns of information that have been used with that principle in the past, thus shortcircuiting ABLE's original general and weak method of selecting principles.
 Ultimately a principle can be completely proceduralized (for a set of analogous contexts) so that application is completely automatic.
 This final automatic knowledge may well be an ingredient of vi/hat one would want to call an expert's mental model in which technical entities (e.
g.
.
 pressure drops) are seen as readily as visible entities like heights.
 References Clement.
 J.
 Students preconceptions in introductory mechanics.
 American Journal of Physics, '\QQ\, , in press.
 Forgy, C.
L.
 Implerventing a Fast Syntactic Pattern l^atcher.
 Technical Report, Computer Science Department, Carnegiefulellon University, August 1979.
 Forgy, C.
E.
 Preliminary 0PS5 Manual.
 Technical Report, Computer Science Department, CarnegieK/lellon University, 1980.
 Green, B.
, McCloskey, M.
.
 Caramazza, A.
 Curvilinear fulotion in the Absence of External Forces: Naive Beliefs About the Motion of Objects Sc/ence, December 1980, 270(5J, 11391141.
 Halliday.
 D.
 and Resnick, R.
 Fundamentals of Physics.
 New York; John Wiley & Sons 1970.
 Hayes, J.
R.
, and Simon, H.
A.
 Understanding written task instructions.
 In Gregg, L.
W.
 (Ed.
).
 Knowledge and Cognition.
 Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Eribaum Assoc, 1974.
 Larkin, J.
H.
, McDermott, J.
, Simon, D.
P,, Simon, H.
A.
 Ivlodels of competence in solving physics problems.
 Cognitive Science, 1980,4,317345.
 Larkin, J,H.
, fvlcDermott, J.
, Simon, D.
P.
, and Simon, H.
A.
 Expert and novice performance in solving physics problems.
 Science, June 1980,208, 13351342.
 Larkin.
 J.
H.
 The Role of Problem Representation in Physics.
 C.
I.
P.
 429, Carnegiefvlellon University, 1981, Presented at a Conference on fvlental fvlodels, La Jolla, CA.
 October, 1980.
 Larkin, J.
H Enriching formal knowk ige: A model for learning to 110 solve problems in physics.
 In J R.
 Anderson (Ed ), Cognitive skills and their acquisition.
 Hillsdale, H.
J.
; La.
'.
icnce drlbaum Associates, Inc.
, 1981.
 Lewis, C H.
 Production system models ol practice ellccts.
 PhD thesis, University of Michigan, 1978.
 McDermott.
 J.
 Some strengths of production system architectures.
 In NATO A.
S.
I, proceedings: Strytural/process theories of complex human behavior.
 The Netherlands: A.
W.
 Sijthoff, International Publishing Company, 1978.
 Neves.
 D.
 and Andersen, J.
R.
 Knowledge Compilation: Mechanisms for the Automatization of Cognitive Skills.
 In Anderson, J.
R.
 (Ed.
), Cognitive Sl<ilis and Then Acquisition.
, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Eribaum Associates, Inc.
, 1981.
 Newell, A.
 and Simon, H.
 A.
 Human Problem Solving.
 Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, Inc.
 1972.
 Newell.
 A,.
 Shaw, J.
C.
.
 & Simon, H.
A.
 A variety of intelligent learning in a general problem solver.
 In Yovits, M.
C.
 & Cameron, S (Eds.
), International Tracts in Computer Science and Technology and Their Application, : Pergamon Press, 1960.
 Newell.
 A.
 Production systems: Models of control structures.
 In Chase, W.
G.
 (Ed), Visual information processing.
 New York: Academic Press, 1973.
 Simon, D.
P.
 and Simon, HA.
 Individual differences in solving physics problems.
 In Siegler, R.
 (Ed.
), Children's thinking: What develops?.
 Hillsdale, NJ.
: Lawrence Eribaum Associates, 1978.
 Ill S U B M I T T E D P A P E R S IntereBtingneii and Nenory for Stories John B.
 Black, Steven P.
 Shwartz and Wendy G.
 Lehnert •Yale University Abstract Two experiments investigated the effects of the number of interesting events in a story on memory for that story.
 The results differed depending on whether or not the story followed a stereotypical script.
 For scriptbased stories, adding interesting events spaced throughout the stories decreased the stories' memorability.
 However, for nonscriptbased stories, adding a few interesting events aided memory for the stories, but adding too many decreased memory.
 These results were interpreted in terms of a limited resource model of story understanding that focusses processing on interesting events.
 Introduction One of the major problem areas for theories of language understanding is how to determine which inferences are important to make while understanding a story and which inferences are not important to make.
 When inferencing is left uncontrolled, a combinatorial explosion of inferences is often the result.
 Schank and Abelson (1977) proposed a group of higher level knowledge structures (scripts, plans, goals and themes) that constrain inferencing to only the most relevant paths, but Schank (1979) concluded that even more constraint was needed.
 In particular, he proposed that interestingness be used to guide inferencing: i.
e.
, that the inferencing process should concentrate on the most interesting events in a narrative.
 Schank argued that an interestingness value could be assigned to events in narratives using the criteria that some events are inherently interesting (e.
g.
, sex, death and violence are always interesting) and other events are interesting in certain contexts (e.
g.
, taking off one's clothes in public is interesting but not in private).
 These interestingness values can then be used to focus the inferencing processes on only the most interesting events in a narrative.
 Lehnert (1979) extended this analysis by adding the notion of resource limitations and making predictions for the recall of stories.
 One of the predictions was that adding interesting events to a story will improve its memorability because they provide markers around which events in the story can be organized.
 However, because processing resources are limited, adding interesting events to a story will only aid memory up to a certain point.
 If a story contains too many interesting events then there will be too many high priority events competing for the limited processing resources, so this "overload'' condition should also be detrimental to recall of the story.
 We conducted two experiments to test these predictions.
 Number of Interesting Events Experiment In this experiment we explicitly tested the prediction that as the number of interesting events in a story increased, the memory for the story would first be aided and then be hurt.
 In particular, we designed four stories of 20 events each such that up to nine unrelated but inherently interesting events could be substituted for uninteresting events with minimal change in the sentences.
 For example, one story about a visit to a library contained the following two uninteresting events On her way Mary passed a friend and remembered she was in her class.
 The first sentence here can be made interesting by merely substituting "prostitutfe" for "friend.
" Two of these four stories were based on stereotypical scripts (visiting the library and eating at a restaurant) while the other two were not (walking in the park and visiting a private club).
 We wrote four versions of each of these stories.
 These versions differed only in the number of interesting events.
 One version had 0, another had 3, a third had 6 and the final one 9.
 These interesting events were distributed evenly throughout each story version.
 :Our main interest was in how this number of interesting events would affect the subjects' recall of the stories.
 We gave the four stories (one in each version) to 32 subjects to read (8 subjects saw a given version of a given story), then after a 15 minute intervening task the subjects were given the story titles and asked to recall as much as they could from the stories.
 These recall protocols were then scored for the gist of the events in the stories.
 ^able 1 gives the percentage of the story statements recalled for each version of the stories.
 Table i Percent of Story Statements Recalled in First Experiment Type of Story Number of Interesting Events 0 3 6 9 Script 65 51 52 56 Nonscript 53 59 49 A2 The results were quite different for the different kinds of story.
 In particular, the nonscript stories followed the predicted pattern: i.
e.
, adding 3 interesting events improved recall but adding more hurt recall.
 However, recall of the script stories was best with 0 interesting events, second best with 9, and worse with the intermediate values of 3 and 6.
 113 Our interpretation of these results is that in the scriptbased stories there is already a story organization (namely, the script), so adding interesting events is harmful to recall because the existing organization is disrupted.
 In the 0 interesting events condition, subjects can reconstruct a scriptbased story during recall by merely remembering that it was a typical implementation of the script (e.
g.
, a typical library story).
 However, adding interesting events makes straight reconstruction no longer possible.
 The slight upturn at 9 interesting events might occur because by this time the subjects have completely abandoned trying to use the script as a reconstruction aid and merely focused on the interesting events as memory organizers.
 namely, remembering the story as a list of deviations.
 script plus a With the nonscript stor hand, such a representation is there are no organizing scripts the interesting events provide the story and the construction during reading is facilitated esting events spaced throughout interesting events are massed, ces available for processing loaded" so the memory for a s teresting events is even worse interesting events.
 les, on the other not possible because In these stories, the organization for of this organization by having the interthe story.
 If the the limited resourare "locally overtory with massed inthan one with no With the nonscript stories, on the other hand, the results were as predicted because there was no strong preexisting organization in the interesting events condition.
 Specifically, adding 3 interesting events aided recall, but the 6 and 9 events conditions led to worse recall because of an overabundance of interesting events.
 Massed and Spaced Interesting Events Experiment In this experiment we explicitly tested the prediction from Lehnert's limited resource model that it is the density of interesting events rather than the absolute number that determines recall.
 In the first experiment, the number of interesting events in the story was confounded with the density of interesting events.
 In this experiment we used the same basic stories but had only the 0 and 3 interesting events conditions.
 Now, however, we varied density independently of number by having the interesting events either be located adjacent to one another (the massed condition) or be evenly spaced throughout the story as before (the spaced condition).
 The procedure was the same as in the first experiment with 24 subjects this time (but still 8 per group).
 Table 2 gives the percentage of the story statements recalled in the versions of the stories.
 Table 2 Percent of Story Statements Recalled in Second Experiment Type of Story Number of Interesting Events 0 3 Spaced 3 Massed Script 55 58 64 Nonscript 50 55 46 As with the first experiment, the results were quite different for the two types of stories.
 With the script stories, there was essentially no difference between the 0 and 3spaced conditions, but the 3massed condition led to better recall of the story.
 With the nonscript stories, on the other hand, the results confirmed the expectation that the spaced interesting events would improve recall, while the massed ones would decrease recall.
 Conclusions The nonscript stories conformed to our expectations that adding a few interesting events spaced throughout a story would increase the story's memorability, but that adding too many interesting events or having them massed together would decrease the story's memorability.
 The results were different, however, if the stories were highly stereotyped, scriptbased stories.
 In particular, adding interesting events to scriptbased stories disrupts the existing script organization and hence led to less memorable stories unless these disruptive events were massed together in the story.
 Thus a writer can "spice up" a text by adding inherently interesting statements, but this procedure will increase the reader's memory only if the text was poorly organized originally.
 References Graesser, A.
, Gordon, S.
E.
 and Sawyer, J.
D.
 Recognition memory for typical and atypical actions in scripted activities: Test of a script pointer + tag hypothesis.
 Journal of Verbal Learnine and Verbal Behavior.
 1979, 18, 319332.
 Lehnert, W.
G.
 Text processine effects and recall memory.
 Research Report no.
 157, Department of Computer Science, Yale University, 1979.
 Schank, R.
C.
 Interestingness: Controlling inferences.
 Artificial Intelligence.
 1979, 12, 273297.
 Schank, R.
C.
 and Abelson, R.
P.
 Scripts.
 plans, goals and understanding.
 Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1977.
 This research was supported by Sloan foundation.
 a grant from the Our interpretation of these results is that with the scriptbased stories, having the disruptive interesting events massed allows the reader to store them in memory as separate units which is harder to do if the interesting events are spaced throughout the story.
 Thus the massed condition facilitates a memory representation like the one proposed by Graesser, Gordon, and Sawyer (1979) — 114 Use of GoalPlan Knowledge In Understanding Stories Edward E.
 Smith & Allan M.
 Collins Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc.
 There seems to be a growing consensus among researchers that understanding a story involves constructing a representation of the characters' goals and plans (e.
g.
, Rumelhart, 1977; Schank & Abelson, 1977; Wilensky, 1978).
 There is, however, relatively little experimental evidence for people's online construction of such goalplan representations, and the purpose of the present experiment was to provide such evidence.
 In our paradigm, subjects are presented a fiveline story, one line (or sentence) at a time.
 Subjects press a button as soon as they understand a sentence, and the sequence of reading times obtained with a particular story is assumed to offer a linebyline description of the process whereby a representation is constructed for that story.
 The general idea behind our study was to systematically delete mention of certain goals and plans needed to understand the story, and to see if readers then took longer at lines where they would have to infer these missing goals and plans.
 To get more specific, we have to deal with a story in detail.
 Consider then the following story about an operation.
 1.
 While John was laid off, his wife became seriously ill.
 2.
 John needed money to pay for an operation.
 3a.
 He decided to borrow money from his Uncle Harry.
 3b.
 He would give his Uncle Harry a quick call.
 3c.
 He had to find out Uncle Harry's phone number.
 4.
 John reached for the most recent suburban directory.
 5.
 John was overjoyed Uncle Harry agreed to the loan.
 By our analysis, this story can be represented by four levels of embedded goals and contains one plan.
 At the John's goal (an inference of getting plans, where each level goal and its associated first or top level would be of his wife getting better from line 1) and his plan her an operation (inference from line 2).
 A "operation" plan, person have money, becomes the goal precondition for the however, is that the and this precondition at the second level (it is explicitly stated in line 2), while the plan at the second level is to borrow money (see line 3a).
 The "borrow" plan also has a precondition, namely being in contact with the lender, and this becomes the goal at the third level (see line 3b); the plan at this level is to phone the lender (see line 3b).
 Finally, the "phone" plan has as a precondition that one know the telephone number, and this is the goal at the fourth level (see line 3c); the plan at this level is to use the directory (see line 4).
 None of our subjects saw this full version of the operation story.
 Rather they saw a version with two lines deleted.
 As an example, some subjects read the story with lines 3a and 3b deleted.
 We expected these subjects to be relatively slow in reading line 3c because there is a sizeable gap between the goal mentioned in it and the goal and plan given by the directly preceding line 2.
 That is, by deleting lines 3a and 3b, we gapped a couple levels of goals and plans and our subjects must fill this gap when reading line 3c, which should take time.
 When these subjects get to line 4, however, they should read it relatively quickly; for now there is no gap in the underlying goalplan representation that needs to be filled.
 In contrast to the case just described, other subjects read the operation study with lines 3b and 3c deleted.
 These subjects should read line 3a relatively quickly (there is no gap to fill in the goalplan representation), but read line 4 relatively slowly (two levels of goals and plans have been gapped, and need to be filled at this point)115 So, by varying which lines of the story are deleted, we can manipulate the size of the gap that a reader must fill when reading a particular story line.
 Since these gapsizes are measured in units of underlying goals and plans, a finding that reading time increases with gap size would be evidence for the online construction of a goalplan representation.
 With stories like the operation one, we have obtained the predicted gapsize effect — the time to read a line increases monotonically with the number of goals and plans that have to be filled in at that point  though its magnitude tends to be greater on some lines than others.
 We were concerned, however, that the gapsize effect might only occur with stories that explicitly emphasize characters' intentions, i.
e.
, readers might only construct goalplan representations for stories that explicitly use intentional constructions like would give and decided to.
 For this reason (and others) we rewrote our stories so that sentences that were once intentional in tone now became actional.
 This required changing the order of the rewritten sentences, since the chronological order for actions is the reverse of that for intentions.
 In the actional version of the operation story, for example, John first reaches for the directory, then finds Uncle Harry's new number, then calls him, and then asks him for a loan — the opposite order of lines 3a, 3b, 3c, and 4 in the original story.
 Once having created these actional versions of the stories we then varied which lines were deleted, thereby varying the size of the goalplan gap that the reader had to fill.
 We again found that the time to read a sentence increased with its associated gap size (though again the effect's magnitude depended on the exact line being read) .
 These results suggest that people construct roughly the same goalplan representation of a story regardless of whether the story emphasizes the characters' actions or intentions.
 References Rumelhart, D.
 E.
 Understanding and summarizing brief stories.
 In D.
 LaBerge & J.
 Samuels (Eds.
), Basic processes in reading; Perception and comprehension.
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1977.
 Schank, R.
, & Abelson, R.
 Scripts, plans, goals, and understanding.
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1977.
 Wilensky, R.
 Why John married Mary: Understanding stories involving recurring goals.
 Cognitive Science, 1978, 2, 235266.
 116 INFERENCES IN STORY COMPREHENSION RAYMONDE GUINDON Department of Psychology University of Colorado, Boulder Abstract Predictions were made about the types and the number of inferences to be found in the verbal protocols of subjects reading difficult to understand texts.
 The predictions were made on the basis of two alternative models of inference generation, the backward bottomup inference and the forward bottomup inference.
 It was also hypothesized that plangoal and script inferences would be stored longer in STM than coreference and role identification inferences.
 This implies that plangoal and script inferences are more likely to be reported than coreference and role Identification inferences.
 The protocol analyses support the backward bottomup inference model and support the assumed length of storage in STM of the different types of inferences.
 1.
0 Introduction The study of the generation of inferences in text comprehension is Important because it is believed to be one of the main mechanism by which a cohesive text representation is built.
 While inferences are not to be equated with expectations, it has not always been clear how inferences interact with topdown processing.
 Some researchers have proposed a forward bottomup inference model.
 The inferences generated at the input of a sentence are strictly determined by the local information in the sentence and they are unconstrained by the context (Rieger, 1975; Thorndyke, 1976).
 In Thorndyke's model (1978), diverse forward bottomup inferences are generated from each new input sentence.
 Their number depends on the presentation rate of the text, the difficulty of the text, the purpose in reading, etc.
 Some of these Inferences could then be compatible with an incoming sentence, facilitating its comprehension.
 Other researchers have proposed backward, constrained models (Havlland and Clark, 1974; Kintsch and van Dijk, 1978; Wilensky, 1978).
 The inferences generated from the input sentence are constrained by the previous sentences.
 The inferences are produced specifically to establish a coherence relation between the semantic representation of the current sentence and the representation of the text.
 The type and number of inferences generated are constrained by the context.
 Consider a simplified illustration of Wilensky's algorithm to explain events (1978).
 The inferences generated from an event are possible plans for that event.
 Those plans are checked to see whether one of these plans is a known plan, or is a plan for a know goal, or is a plan for a known theme, or is an instrumental plan for a know plan.
 Constraints are provided by already asserted or inferred themes, goals or plans, and by the fact that actions must be explained relative to them.
 Experimental evidence seem to be somewhat more in favor of a backward, constrained generation of inferences.
 The results of Thorndyke's experiment (1976) were proposed as a support for a forward bottomup Inference model.
 However, this experiment might suffer an identlflability problem.
 Using previously experimentally derived inferences, a recognition test with those inferences and sentences of the texts is given.
 It is found that the false alarm rate for compatible inferences is greater than for incompatible inferences.
 However, such predictions can be derived as well from a backward bottomup Inference model than from a forward bottomup inference model.
 A backward inference model will predict that the compatible inferences, that is, those which establish coherence, become part of the text representation and are likely to be falsely recognized as text sentences (see Keenan,McKoon and Kintsch, in Kintsch, 1974).
 Incompatible inferences, which do 117 not establish coherence, do not become part of the text representation and are not likely to be falsely recognized.
 In an experiment by Miller and Kintsch (1980), subjects have to produce continuations for a sentence presented by Itself, In a specific context establishing clearly a main topic, or In a nonseclflc context suggesting many topics.
 It Is predicted and found that the subjects in the no or nonspecific context will rely on the local constraints provided by the target sentence to produce these continuations On the other hand, it is predicted and found that subjects in the specific context condition will produce continuations related to the main topic.
 Any model of inference generation, backward or forward, will predict the continuations to be determined by the local constraints in the no or nonspecific contexts.
 However, a forward inference model cannot account for the fact that the continuations produced in the specific context condition are all related to the main topic (constrained), while a backward Inference model predicts just that.
 2.
0 Method and Predictions The study to be presented makes predictions over the types and the number of inferences likely to he found in the verbal protocols of subjects reading difficulttounderstand texts.
 These predictions are based on the two alternative models of inference generation, the forward and the backward models, they are based on assumed or known properties of the memory storage of inferences, and they are based on the theory of verbal reports (Ericsson and Simon, 1980).
 Nine subjects were trained to make thlnkingaloud and retrospective reports on their inferences on twelve practice texts.
 It was emphasized that they should not try to report all the Inferences that they could eventually make, but only report the inferences they were making automatically, without effort.
 However, they were also Instructed that some texts might be harder than others and that It would be normal to find the production of inferences more difficult in those cases, but still to report them.
 The texts used were "Paul's Outing" (Collins, Brown and Larkln, 1977), "The Crowd", an adaptation of a text used by Bransford and Johnson (1973), and "Noon, Downtown", a short humourous narrative.
 In all the texts, the last sentence indicated clearly the topic of the text.
 The text "The Crowd" is more descriptive than narrative.
 For an Inference to be reported, it.
 must be stored in STM and during a minimal amount of time (Ericsson and Simon, 1980).
 Inferences likely to be reported are Inferences of plans and goals, and inferences of scripts (Schank and Abelson, 1977).
 In the protocols, explicit inferences of plans and goals would be like: "The driver went underneath the truck to repair it.
".
 Explicit inferences of scripts would be like: "This is going to be about traffic.
" or "He seems to go to a movie.
".
 Inferences of plans and goals are likely to be reported because they are the major coherence relations in the text representation of narratives.
 They need to be stored long enough in STM (short term memory) to build the cohesive text representation and they become a permanent part of the text representation.
 Inferences of scripts are likely to be reported because the scripts are used to interpret a certain number of sentences and are the basis of the text representation.
 Inferences not likely to be reported are coreference relations and role identifications.
 Coreference relations are the determination of the referent of a pronoun or a definite description.
 They are often made automatically, on the basis of the structure of the text, without requiring STM to store intermediate computations, and therefore, are not likely to be reported.
 Role identifications are the recognition that a story character or object correspond to a script character or object.
 The recognition is made on the basis of functional or categorical information provided by the text.
 Presumably, this is accomplised through direct patternmatching and therefore does not use STM to store Intermediate results and cannot be reported.
 However, if the inferred coreference or role identification reveals itself to be Inadequate, it is likely that the reader will report the inadequacy and will report the new assignment .
 118 For each text, a set of inferences were a priori derived and predicted to appear explicitly, either frequently or infrequently, in the protocols.
 It Is predicted that the most frequent explicit inferences will be those of plans and goals, and scripts.
 A related prediction is that the most frequently implicit inferences will be those of coreferences and role identifications.
 By implicit, it is meant that the protocol in icates rather certainly that the inference was made but only indirectly.
 For example, suppose two of the sentences were: "Paul plunked down $5 at the window.
.
.
.
 but he refused to take it.
".
 Suppose also that the protocol contains something like: "Well, I couldn't understand why John wouldn't take the change.
".
 It is clear that the reader made the coreference relation between "he" and "John".
 According to the backward bottomup inference models, plangoal inferences should be reported only after the event they help to explain is read, and in most cases, only one coherence relation should be reported for that event.
 According to the forward bottomup inference models (Thorndyke, 1976), numerous inferences could be reported when a sentence is read, potentially explaining an event in a future sentence.
 The protocols were analysed In terms of the types and frequency of the explicitly and implicitly reported inferences.
 A simple consistency checking was performed on the classification of the Inferences using a third of the protocols (9 out of 27).
 The consistency estimate was about .
95.
 In every case of a reported coherence relation, it has been reported after the event It explained, and in only one case has there een ore than one coherence relation proposed (there were two).
 This is consistent with a backward bottomup inference model.
 Table 1 presents the types, predicted frequencies and observed frequencies in the protocols of the a priori determined inferences.
 reported than coreference or role identification Inferences.
 Table 2 presents the frequencies of inferences explicitly generated, implicitly generated and of inferences for which there is no indication in the protocols that they have been made.
 The data are summed over the two methods because while there is a slight tendency for more inferences to be reported in the thinklngaloud reports, this is not true for all stories.
 Script and plangoal Inferences are more often explicit than implicit or not mentionned, while coreference and role Identification inferences are most often implicit.
 The location and the number of inferred coherence relations support a backward bottomup inference model.
 The greater frequency of reported plangoal and script inferences is consistent with their assumed length of storage in STM and LTM.
 The relative unfrequency of role identification and coreference inferences supports their assumed automaticity and lack of use of STM to store intermadiate results.
 The somewhat less good fit of the data to the predictions in "The Crowd" might be due to the fact that "The Crowd" is more descriptive than narrative anc that the models for inference generatlor were devised for narratives.
 Table 1 Observed frequencies of each instance of the predicted inferences summed over the two methods NOON, DOWNTOWN (each on a total of 5) Pitdicreo freijoooL, pg caust p H p Is pg p ^ pg 5 3 4 1 4 2 3 M=.
6 Predicted unfrequent: None of the 6 instances of coreferences has been observed in any protocol M= .
0 The overall frequency of the predicted frequent inferences is .
65, and of the unfrequent ones is .
11.
 As was predicted, plangoal and script inferences are much more ferquently 119 PAUL'S OUTING (over a total of 6) Predicted frequent: pg pg pg pg 5 5 6 5 M .
9 Acknowledgment I would like to thank Dr.
 Anders Ericsson for his useful advice and encouragement .
 Predicted unfrequent: cor cor role role role role cause 1 2 0 1 0 1 0 role cause 0 2 M= .
1 THE CROWD (over a total of 6) Predicted frequent: scr scr pg scr scr cause scr 1 3 4 2 4 1 3 M= .
5 Predicted unfrequent: role role cor role cor 1 1 0 1 0 impl Impl 2 1 M= .
2 pg = plangoal role = roleidentlflcation scr = script impl = implicature M = mean Table 2 Types and frequencies of inferences as a function of stories and methods.
 NOON, DOWNTOWb EXPLICIT 21 pg 0 cor PAUL'S OUTING EXPLICIT 20 pg 3 cor 2 role 1 cause THE CROWD EXPLICIT 16(15) pg 5(4) role 3 impl 1 cause 1(0) cor I IMPLICIT 6(2) pg 12 cor IMPLICIT 3(2) pg 9 cor 12 role IMPLICIT 7 role 7 cor 1(0) pg NOT FOUND 3(5) pg NOT FOUND 1(0) pg NOT FOUND 11(12) pg References Bransford, J.
 D.
, Johnson, M.
 K.
 Contextual Prerequisites for Understanding: Some Investigations of Comprehension and Recall.
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1972, 11, 717726.
 Collins, A.
 M.
, Brown, J.
 S.
, Larkin, K.
 M.
 Inference in Text Understanding.
 Technical Report No.
 40.
 Bolt, Beraneck and Newman, 1977.
 Ericsson, K.
 A.
, Simon, H.
 A.
 Verbal Reports as Data.
 Psychological Review, 1980, 87, 215251.
 Kintsch, W.
 The Representation of Meaning in Memory.
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
: Erlbaum, 1974.
 Kintsch, W.
, van Dijk, T.
 A.
 Toward a Model of Text Comprehension and Production.
 Psychological Review, 1978, 85, 363394.
 R.
, Kintsch, Aspects of and Readability W.
 Prose Miller, J.
 Knowledgebased Comprehension Presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Boston, April 1980.
 Rieger, C.
 Conceptual Memory and Inference.
 In R.
 C.
 Schank (Ed.
), Conceptual Information Processing.
 Amsterdam: NorthHolland, 1975.
 Schank, R.
 C, Abel son, R.
 P.
 Scripts, Plans, Goals, and Understanding.
 Lawrence Erlbaum, 1977.
 Thorndyke, P.
 W.
 The Role of Inferences in Discourse Comprehension.
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1976, 15, 437446.
 Wllensky, R.
 Understanding Stories.
 Research Report No partment of Computer Science, iversity, 1978.
 Goalbased 140, DeYale Un120 SelfEmbedding is Not A Linguistic Issue* John M Carroll M I T Linguistics and Philosophy Dept.
 and IBM Watson Research Center Anyone familiar with language research over the last 25 years or so will be no stranger to examples like these: The woman died.
 The woman the man met died.
 The woman the man the girl loved met died.
 Such examples have an illustrious past, both in the formal study of language and in the psychology of language.
 The selfembedding (SE) properly they display singularly places natural language syntax beyond the generative capacity of finite devices (Chomsky, 1959).
•• The interaction of SE with language comprehension entrains a remarkable phenomenon: one (or zero) levels of SE cause no noticable increment in comprehension difficulty, but two (or more) levels are typically associated with substantial impairment of comprehension (e g.
.
 Miller andlsard, 1964).
 Explaining SE.
 This remarkable fact has maintained the study of SE as a preeminent topic in psycholinguislics.
 A variety of accounts have been produced The earliest accounts tended to emphasize the extent to which SE overtaxed memory resources for speakers and hearers (Miller and Chomsky.
 1963: 470ff.
; Yngve.
 I960).
 Later accounts tended to focus on the kinds of operations that were invoked in the course of processing SE structures (Miller and Isard, 1964; Bcver.
 1970).
 Significantly, though, all of these accounts regarded SE as a general structural properly — whose expression in language was of special interest  not as a property unique to language ex hypothesi.
 Miller and Chomsky (1963: 484) write "Selfembedding of such great theoretical significance .
.
.
 that we should certainly look for occurrences of it in nonlinguistic contexts.
" Bever (1970) cited as one of the strengths of his account of SE processing problems that analogous principles seemed to explain phenomena in visual perception.
 Clearly though, there is another theoretical option.
 One could hypothcsJ7e that SE phenomena are special to language.
 O n such a view, the natural explanatory mechanism for the interaction of SE with sentence comprehension would be languagespecific  not some general property of memory or perceptual process as suggested by Bever, Miller and Chomsky, etc.
 This view is (often implicitly) adopted by many natural language parsing theorists.
 A recent example is Fodor and Frazier (I9K0) who suggest that the interaction of SE with sentence comprehension be theoretically reconstructed as a parsing principle attaching an incoming word or phrase into its surface structure using the smallest possible number of new nonterminal nodes (Fodor and Frazicr.
 1980: 426434).
 (.
See Carroll.
 1981; Ford.
 Bresnan, and Kaplan, 1981, and Wanner.
 1980; for further discussion of this model ) The question of whether generalizations about SE phenomena are linguistic or still more general is a question of fact.
 But it is worth emphasizing that assumptions one way or the other lead immediately to empirical consequence.
 For example, the assumption that SE is strictly linguistic actually does some work in the analysis of Fodor and Frazicr I he single strong distinction Fodor and Frazier (1980) are able to draw between their model and that of Wanner (1980) turns precisely on their languagespecific analysis of SE phenomena.
 While the resolution of this issue may ultimately be decided on Ihcordical grounds.
 I will focus chiefly on the presentotion of data whose prima facie analysis entails the view that the correct level of generalization for addressing SE phenomena is something like "complex sequences" I will discuss examples from film, dance, music.
 .
ind social interaction Then.
 1 will turn back to the theoretical level .
ind outline a proposal, following Bevcr's (1970) Double Function Hypothesis.
 Film An obvious candidate for SE analysis in film is the "flashh.
ick ' scene: an entire scene is embedded into another scene In the cinema of D.
W.
 Griffith, for example, a scene (S) can consist of a longshot (L) followed by a series of detailshots (D) A dclailshol may itself include a scene.
 This h.
xs the effect of embedding a scene within a scene In Carroll (1980: 6163) I have discussed the following grammarfragment as the basis of a formal analysis of this sort of composition S= = > L + D* D = = > D' + S + DThe righthand side of the second rule introduces the "prime" as a notation to indicate that a return is structurally implied.
 This amounts 10 a special sort of indexing Several examples of this structure occur in Griffith's Broken Blossoms.
 Richard Barlhlemess, as the Chinaman, casts a mistyeyed look within a detailshot, and immediately there is a cut away to a flashback of his youth.
 It would not have been possible for Griffith to cut away from Barlhlemess, shou the flashback, and then proceed with the storyline without first returning to Barlhlemess The return is obligatory; it is part of the structure of (Griffith's) cinema As subsequent examples will show this is the crucial property of sequences that affords SE.
 If a sequential domain has a structure strong enough to afford obligatory returns, it can have SE.
 (This, of course, is precisely analogous to points made by Chomsky, 1959, with respect to language.
) Dance.
 A wellknown example of dance within dance is in the Nutcracker Suite where several episodes of puppetdance occur as pari of the ballet itself.
 More common, but also more subtle, arc examples in which a dance phrase (Lasher, 1981) is interrupted, whereupon a complete and distinct other phrase is danced, then finally the original phrase runs to completion.
 One class of such examples occurs when a female dancer is lifted by a male dancer in classical ballet: the female assumes a rigid posture while the male carries her and continues moving; when she is returned to the floor, the female continues with her own dance.
 Another class of examples are cases in which a group of dancers assume rigid postures while a subset, usually a couple or a single dancer, perform a dance.
 At the completion of the embedded dance, the group resumes.
 These latter types of examples have analogs in music where they are easier to cite because of the available notation Music.
 Music has an extremely articulated structure and affords several classes of SE structures One of these is the cadenza: a strong cadence is interrupted by a solo and then completed.
 For example, the cadence 16/4 — V 7 — I, closing a section of a violin concerto, can be interrupted by a violin solo: 16/4 — V 7 — Solo — I W h e n the interruption amounts to a delay in the matrix structure, it is often called "parenthesis" (Meyer, 1973).
 Meyer discusses an example from Haydn's String Quartet in Eb Major, Opus 50 No.
 3: a melodic patterning of thirds F.
bG, FAb, implying Gllb, and reinforced by harmonic and rhythmic patterns, is interrupted by a four measure repeating abab structure: ".
 .
 the real melody is characterized by goaldirected motion: but the parenthesis is static.
"(p.
 241) Social interaction.
 For some years now.
 Sacks (1973) and associates have been developing a theory of the structure of conversational interactions based on the "adjacency pair" unit The paradigm example is question/answer: A: D o you know what an adjacency pair is? B: No.
 The implication of the "second pair part" entailed by the occurrence of the "first pair part" is sufficient structure to support SE Indeed.
 Goffman (1979: 2589) noticed such examples.
 Al: Can I borrow your hose? B2: D o you need it this very moment? A2: No.
 Bl: Yes.
 Instead of answering A s initial question (and complcteing an adjacency pair structure), B initiates a second questionanswer adjacency pair.
 When this second pair is complete, there is a return to the first structure Goffman also noted an example of multiple SF (B is a trainman in a station) Al: Have yoii got the lime? 82 Standard or Daylight Saving? A3: What time are you running on? B3: Standard.
 A 2 Standard then.
 Bl: It's five o'clock Jefferson (n.
d.
) has shown however that such cases of multiple SE are extremely rare, although noniterative SE is quite common.
 Indeed, it is striking that, as in the case of language, multiple SF structures simply do not obtain One certainly has flashbacks, but never flashbacks within flashbacks W h e n such structures arc employed (as by Alain Resnais in Jc T'aime, Jc T'aime), they are employed precisely in order to confuse the viewer with respect to tempo ral sequence Analogously, one cannot imagine straightforward contexts in which a dance phrase within a dance phrase within a dance phrase could appear in a ballet One cannot embed a theme within a parenthesis within a theme One cannot embed a play within a play within a play Etc.
 In the final section of this paper I want to return to the theoretical analysis of SE phenomena and to suggest a general account of this intermodal restriction.
 121 Double function The double function principle can be pul quite simply as "The same stimulus cannot be perceived in two incompatible ways al the same lime " The prima facie force of the principle in visual perception and language comprehension (Bever.
 1970) and cinema perception (Carroll, 1980: 190193), exclusive of SE phenomena, has been reviewed elsewhere As applied to SE, the line one would want to run is that the categories "embedder" and "embeddee" are perceptually significant and that accordingly an object of perception cannot simultaneously be both embedder and embeddee.
 From this the usual facts regarding SE follow.
 This remains an empirical hypothesis, of course, but the plausibility of the premises for the analysis is considerable.
 In contrast, appeals to memory (Miller and Chomsky, 1963; Yngve, 1960) are less compelling in that people typically can memorize multiple SE sequences — Ihey just can't understand them Appeals to processing constraint are either too vague to assess (Miller and Isard, 1964) or tantamount to the proposal under discussion (Bever, 1970).
 Finally, the crossmodal evidence of SE and the iterative SE constraint strongly indicate that languagespecific analyses are missing the true generalization.
 Notes •This work was facilitated by a fellowship from the National Science Foundation and a sabbatical leave from the IBM Corporation I am grateful lo T o m Bever, Jeff Coulter, ten Meyer, and Margnt Lasher for discussion and criticism " I will presuppose, but not review, the standard distinction between "nesting" and "selfembedding" (Chomsky and Miller, I963K References Bever, T G.
 The cognitive basis for linguistic structures, in J.
R Hayes (Ed.
) Cognition and language learning.
 N e w York: Wiley, 1970.
 Carroll, J.
M.
 Toward a structural psychology of cinema.
 The ffaguc Mouton, 19K0 Carroll, J.
M.
 O n fallen horses racing past barns.
 In Papers from the parasession on language and behavior.
 Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society, 1981.
 Chomsky, N.
 O n certain formal properties of grammars.
 Information and Control.
 1959,2, 137167.
 Chomsky, N.
 and Miller, G.
A.
 Introduction to the formal analysis of natural languages.
 In Luce et al (1963).
 Fodor, J D.
 and Frazier, L Is the human sentence parser an ATN? Cognition.
 1980,8,417459.
 Ford, M.
, Bresnan, J.
, and Kaplan, R A competencebased theory of syntactic closure In J Bresnan (F.
d ) The mental representation of grammatical relations.
 Cambridge; MIT Press, 1981.
 Goffman, E.
 Replies and responses Language in Society, 1979, 5, 257313 Jefferson, G.
 Unpublished research, n.
d.
 Lasher, M D.
 The cognitive representation of an event involving human motion.
 Cognitive Psychology.
 1981.
 Luce.
 R.
D.
.
 Bush, R.
R.
, and Galanter, E.
 (Eds.
) Handbook of mathematical psychology.
 New York; Wiley, 1963.
 Meyer, L B .
 Explaining music.
 Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973.
 Miller, G.
A.
 and Chomsky.
 N.
 Finitary models of language users.
 In Luceet al.
 (1963).
 Miller.
 G.
A.
 and Isard, S.
 Free recall of selfembedded English sentences Information and Control, 1964, 7, 292303 Sacks, H.
 Lecture notes.
 Summer Institute of Linguistics, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1973.
 Wanner, E.
 The A T N and the sausage machine: Which one is balony? Cognition, 1980, 8, 209225.
 Yngve, V.
H A model and an hypothesis for language structure.
 Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society.
 I960.
 104.
 444466 122 CenterEmbedding Revisited Michael B.
 Kac Dept.
 of Linguistics University of Minnesota Minneapolis.
 MN 55455 The severe comprehension difficulty associated with certain centerembedding constructions is perhaps the best known of psychosyntactic phenomena.
 Most attempts at explanation have been variations on a single themethat the c.
e.
 configuration leads to an overload of shortterm memory during processing.
 That this is not the whole story can be seen from considering the fact, rarely noted, that c.
e.
 constructions exist which are understood quite easily, e.
g.
 (1) If either the Pope is Catholic or pigs have wings then Napoleon loves Josephine.
 To this observation it might be replied that it is not c.
e.
 per se that causes difficulty, but rather MULTIPLE c.
e.
; thus, (1) would not be expected to pose problems since it is embedded only to a depth of 1.
 But the same is true of (2) If if the Pope is Catholic then pigs have wings then Napoleon loves Josephine.
 which is, at best, at the outer reaches of comprehensibility.
 The facts regarding (12) can be accounted for by a few simple assumptions.
 The first is that constituent recognition is carried out in strict leftright fashion; assume further that in attempting to analyze (12), the parser has at some point built a structure of the form (3) If/either S, then/or S^ then Sy and that at this point the following procedures are invoked: (4) a.
 When an ^l.
 is encountered, open an S at that point; the locate the first then to the right of this _[£ and close at the end of the S immediately following.
 b.
 When an either is encountered, open an S at that point; then locate the first or to the right of this either and close at the end of the S immediately following.
 Applied to (1), (4) will operate in straightforward fashion; it will close the S beginning with H directly after S,, and the S beginning with either directly after S?.
 Applied to (2), however, it will nisparse, closing the S beginning with the first i_f prematurely after S2a garden path effect of a familiar kind.
 A parallel account can be given of the difference between (5) a.
 That for Harry to like Maxine would annoy Fred bothers me.
 b.
 That that Harry likes Maxine annoys Fred bothers me.
 where both involve nesting of complementizerverb dependencies, but where (5b) is considerably more difficult to process than (5a).
 Assume that complementizers are associated with the verbs that they mark as nonmain by the following procedure: (6) a.
 Link each for and to to the first infinitive to its right.
 b.
 Link each that to the first finite verb to its right.
 In (5a), that is linked to would while the for and to are both linked to like, as desired; in (5b), however, there will be a garden path since the first that will be erroneously linked to likes rather than annoys.
 Thus (5ab) and (12) are treated analogously in that that errors of prematurity are committed in the cases that pose comprehension difficulty but not in the cases that don't.
 The general idea embodied in the foregoing can be further extended.
 Consider Object relative constructions like (7) a.
 The rat that the cat chased squeaked.
 b.
 The rat that the cat that the dog bit chased squeaked.
 Examples of this type are perhaps most familiar from discussions of c.
e.
 That (7b) should be more difficult to process than (7a) falls directly out of general design features of a syntactic parser currently under investigation called MULTIGAP ('multiple pass groupanalyzing parser') and is, moreover, attributed to a garden path effect much like the ones hypothesized in the earlier cases discussed.
 In MULTIGAP, although simple NP's (i.
e.
 NP's without clausal modifiers) are identified early in parsing, recognition of complex NP's is forestalled until after an exploratory phase during which the parser builds a structural representation called a PREANALYSIS, in which the sentence being parsed is parcelled up into a sequence of units called BOUNDED GROUPS (bgroups).
 A key notion here is that of the TRANSITION from one predicate to the next (or from the last predicate to #), i.
e.
 the material that intervenes between the former and the latter.
 If conditions are satisfied for construing the latter as subordinate to the former (e.
g.
 if there is an overt subordinator in the transition) then the transition is of one type, labelled B'; otherwise, it is of a different type, labelled B.
 Crosscutting this dichotomy is a distinction between STRONG and WEAK transitions.
 If the transition from a predicate of n places to the next predicate, or to #, contains at least n1 NP's, it is strong, weak otherwise.
 In (7b), the transitions from bi_t to chased and from chased to squeaked are both weak, while that from squeaked to # is strong.
 Abbreviatorily, the four transition types are labelled s (strong B), w (weak B), s' (strong B"), and w' (weak B').
 The parser not only types transitions according to this scheme, but also inserts into each a special boundary marker, 1 , to delineate fagroups.
 If a transition is of any type other than s_, J is positioned directly after the initial predicate in the sequence under consideration, otherwise directly after the last NP of the transition.
 (Recall that simple NP recognition has already taken place.
) The preanalysis of (7b) is thus 123 (8) The rat that the cat that the dog bit 1 chased]] squeaked ]] # 1̂ W2 Once the preanalysis is set, the parser looks for possible opening points of complex NP'ssequences of the form NPSUBV and NPSUBNP.
 (The full MULTIGAP design is capable of dealing with cases where no overt subordinator occurs, but discussion will be limited here to cases where there is such a subordinator.
) The opening is labelled as belonging to type 1 (Subject relative) or type 2 (other) depending on which type of opening sequence is found.
 Accordingly, the parser will find two type 2 openings in (8): the rat that the cat and the cat that the dog.
 Closure is effected by a procedure which, if the opening is type 1, closes at the first s to the right, but at the first w to the right of a type 2 opening.
 Thus in (7a), the complex NP will be correctly closed after chased, but in (7b), there will be premature closure of the larger NP at w^ rather than at w,, an error of prematurity exactTy analogous to those discussed earlier.
 Note, moreover, that c.
e.
 of a type 1 relative in a type 2 construction poses no problems: (9) The mouse that the cat who chased the rat saw squeaked.
 While (9) is not absolutely straightforward, it can be understood with a little effort, which is not the case with (7b) even though (9) is of the same depth of embedding.
 The difference is accounted for in this treatment by the fact that the larger NP is closed off directly after saw (i.
e.
 after the one w) while the smaller one closes directly after ratat the first s.
 Because there is only one w, no error of prematurity occurs.
 Complex NP's actually come in two varieties, which we might call first and second degree; in a first degree NP.
 there is only one predicate, while in a second degree NP the main predicate of the construction has a complement.
 The two types of NP are somewhat different in their behavior in that while type 2 NP's of the first degree always end in wtransitions, a type 2 NP of the second degree may end in either a w or an £, thus compare (10) a.
 The boy that Harry believes U likes Maxine ]] saw Sue I # w' (11) The boy who believes that the girl who kissed Harry likes Maxine saw Sue.
 which, like (9), requires some effort, but is within bounds; however, (12) The boy who believes that the girl who thinks that Harry likes Maxine saw Sue kissed Samantha.
 evidently is not.
 In the case of (11), the inner NP is parsed first, then the outer one, and there is no erroneous closure.
 In the case of (12), by contrast, there are no first degree NP's, and the NP beginning with the bojf̂  is closed prematurely, after Maxine.
 Honesty compels mention of a perplexing case that this approach cannot handle.
 If, in a c.
e.
 type 2 relative of the first degree, one of the NP's is replaced by a pronoun, comprehensibility seems to increase: (13) The rat that the cat I saw chased squeaked.
 I have no explanation to offer for this fact.
 A general assumption underlies the treatment advanced here, as follows: in an optimal parser, one seeks the simplest procedures that will apply in errorfree fashion to the simplest casescases in which a construction of type x contains no other constructions of type X.
 Effects of the sort observed here are then explained as being due to some of the more complex cases being tractable in terms of maximally simple procedures while others are not.
 Given the results described above, the principle seems to have a measure of plausibility as at least a working hypothesis.
 1̂ 2̂ b.
 The boy that Harry believes ]] Maxine likes I saw Sue J s' w £ In (10a), the Subject NP ends at s.
^ while in (10b) it ends at w, corresponding to the fact that in the former case the head NP is the Subject of the complement clause while in the latter it is the Object of that clause.
 The parser copes with this fact by being equipped with two closure mechanisms, one for first degree complex NP's, and another for second degree NP's.
 A first degree NP can be identified by checking to see that no B" intervenes between the opening and the first B to the right thereof; if such a B' is found, closure is forestalled.
 Once all first degree NP's have been closed, the parser closes second degree NP's by simply looking for the first available B to the right of any opening for which no corresponding closure has been made.
 (Any B that has already been swallowed up into a previously recognized NP is no longer available for consideration.
) It is a consequence of this feature of the parser that a second degree complex NP with a c.
e.
 first degree NP should be more easily processed than one with a second degree NP, an expectation that is evidently borne out: compare 124 The Comprehension of Focussed and NonFocussed Pronouns Jeanette K.
 Gundel and Deborah A.
 Dahl University of Minnesota Gundel (1980) has shnwn that fnni<;<;pH nrnnmin^ like the underlined form in (1) and nonfocussed pronouns like the underlined form in (2) have different comnunicative functions.
 (1) Q.
 Who did they call? A.
 Pat said they called HER.
 (2) Q.
 Has Pat been called yet? A.
 Pat said they called her TWICE.
 The purpose of this paper is to investigate the possibility that these different functions are associated with different psychological processes underlying the comprehension of pronouns.
 We will begin with a brief description of the linguistic differences between focussed and nonfocussed pronouns.
 The focussed pronoun in (1) is a referring expression.
 Its function, like that of other referring expressions, is to pick out and call the addressee's attention to, some entity in the discourse context.
 Thesediffer from full NP's only in that the entity is assumed to be identifiable on the basis of its presence in the immediate linguistic or nonlinguistic context.
 As with full NP's, focus on a pronoun is obligatory when the pronoun is part of tiie corment of a sentence (i.
e.
 new information being asserted, questioned, etc.
 about a topic), as in (1).
 Pronouns which are topics can also be focussed, e.
g.
 if there is a topic shift or contrast as in (3)(5).
 (3) I asked Bruce about it.
 HE^ said he didn't CARE.
 (4) THEM, I don't LIKE.
 (5) Q.
 Are Bill and Mary still here? A.
 HE^went HOME, but SHE's in the other ROOM.
 Nonfocussed pronouns like the underlined form in (2J have no independent referring function.
 They are always controlled by already established discourse or sentence topics.
 From a communicative point of view, they are almost completely redundant.
 Their function is thus primarily syntactic.
 This distinction between focussed and nonfocussed pronouns is independent of whether the coreferential full NP is in the same sentence or in a previous sentence in the discourse.
 Furthermore, as seen in (6) and (7), both focussed and nonfocussed pronouns can be non1inguistically evoked.
(Halliday and Hasan (1976) call this exophoric.
) (6) (A sees B reading an application and says) Do you think we should ADMIT her? (nonfocussed) (7) (A hands an application to B and says) Do you think we should admit HER? Although focussed and nonfocussed pronouns have different lexical, syntactic and semantic properties, linguistic theories of anaphora have not generally distinguished the two.
 This is no doubt due partly to the fact that most theories of pronominal anaphora are based on English, which has identical forms for focussed and nonfocussed pronouns and where the latter differ from the former only in that they are unstressed ' and have corresponding phonological reduction in casual speech.
 The one exception is the 3rd person neuter singular U , which is always nonfocussed.
(see Linde (1979) .
For example (8) Q.
 Which do you want? A.
*ril take IT.
 (9)* IT, I don't LIKE.
 However, in many languages nonfocussed pronouns differ lexically from focussed ones.
 Some languages (e.
g.
 Irish.
 Spanish and Polish) have long form focussed pronouns and corresponding short form , usually clitic, nonfocussed pronouns.
 Compare the Polish examples in (10) and (11).
 (lOj Jan je tutaj.
 Ja 30 widzia/am.
 (nonfocussed) is here I him saw "Jan is here.
 I saw him.
" (11) Q.
 Kogo widziajas? who saw "Who did you see?" A.
 Ja JEGO widzia/am.
 I him saw "I saw HIM" (focussed) In most languages, the two sets of pronouns (cormonly referred to as nonemphatic and emphatic respectively) are related historically, the nonfocussed pronoun being a phonologically reduced version of the focussed one.
 There are languages however which have totally unrelated forms for focussed and nonfocussed pronouns.
 For example, in Fijian the 3rd person singular nonfocussed form is e and the corresponding focussed form is koya.
 Finally, there are languages which allow, and in some cases require, socalled zero anaphora (i.
e.
 no form at all) in those cases where English would have a nonfocussed pronoun.
 The following Mandarin example from Li and Thompson(1979)is an illustration of this.
 "(He) brought the water.
" (12) qule shuY lai bringaspect water Focussed pronouns, however, cannot be omitted in these languages.
 While the existence of zero NPanaphora in languages like Spanish, for example, has often been linked to the fact that such languages have subject agreement marking on the verb, it is important to point out that such agreement is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for zero NPanaphora.
 As can be seen from the example in (12), Mandarin allows zero NPanaphora even though it has no agreement marking on the verb.
 In addition to the lexical differences discussed above, focussed pronouns differ from nonfocussed pronouns in their syntactic properties and in conditions on coreference with other NP's .
 In English, nonfocussed pronouns are excluded from certain syntactic environments.
 For example, a direct object must precede an indirect object if the direct object is a nonfocussed pronoun , as illustrated in (13) and (14).
 (13) Q.
 Did you give the books to Tom?.
 A.
 No.
 I gave MARY the books •them (14) Q.
 Which books did you give to Mary? A.
 I gave Mary THEM.
 As (13) shows, it is not nonfocussed NP's in general, but only nonfocussed pronouns, which are excluded fron final position in such sentences.
 On the other hand, some syntactic environments require nonfocussed pronouns, as illustrated in (15) and (16).
 (15) My pocket has a hole in it ^THAT 125 (16) The old dog still has a lot of life left in him •HIM Focussed pronouns also differ from nonfocussed pronouns in conditions on coreference.
 For example, a; noted in Akmajian and Jackendoff (1970) only non ii> focussed pronouns can be coreferential with a following full NP in the same sentence.
 Thus, John and he cai be coreferential in (17) but not in (18).
 (17) After he woke up, John went to TOWN.
 (18) After HE woke up, John went to town.
 Coreference assignments also differ depending on whether the pronoun is focussed or nonfocussed in examples like (19) and (20).
 (19) Mary called Alice and then SARAH called her.
 (20) Mary called Alice and then Sarah called HER.
 Since there are clear linguistic and functional differences between focussed and nonfocussed pronouns, we would now like to address the issue of whether these differences are reflected in differences in processing.
 We suggested above that focussed pronouns can refer to any entity in the inmediate discourse context.
 Nonfocussed pronouns, on the other hand, can only be coreferential with a subset of these, namely established topics.
 If this is true, one might expect that the processing of nonfocussed pronouns would be less complex since the set of available entities is more restricted.
 J'lli ineories ot psychological processes unaeriying pronoun comprehension have generally not distinguished between focussed and nonfocussed pronouns.
 Assumptions about pronoun processing can be classified into two main categories.
 The first, which we will refer to as the Reference Search Hypothesis is stated explicitly in Clark and Clark (1977, p.
 78): "on finding a definite noun phrase, search memory for the entity it was meant to refer to and replace the interpretation of the noun phrase by a reference to the entity directly.
" A similar statement is found in Clark and Sengul (1979): "When listeners encounter 'the woman' or 'she' they are assumed to treat this as given information for which they must find a referent.
 They then search memory for the unique entity to which 'the woman' or 'she' was intended to refer.
"(Note that under this hypothesis pronoun comprehension is not assumed to be essentially different from comprehension of full NP's.
)Caramazza and Gupta (1979) also seem to implicitly accept the Reference Search Hypothesis when, in discussing some of their stimulus sentences, they say:"the sentence materials used in Experiment I could be expected to generate this chain of events because the preposed subordinate clauses do not contain enough information to guide the subject in the search for appropriate referents to the anaphoric pronouns (emphasis added) The second major kind of pronoun processing theory may be referred to as the TopicStability hypothesis.
 A pronoun, in this view, serves not as a signal to the listerner to initiate a memory search, but rather as a signal to assign coreference relations between the pronoun and the discourse topic.
 A statement consistent with this view, though not specifically proposing a processing theory, can be found in Chafe (1974): "if the explanation in terms of consciousness is correct, it is misleading to speak as if the addressee needs to perform some operation of recovery for given information.
 The point is rather that such information is already on stage in the mind.
" KarmiloffSmith (1980) takes a similar view; "anaphoric pronominalization functions as an implicit instruction for the addressee not to recompute for retrieval of an antecedent referent, but rather to treat the pronoun as the default case for the thematic subject of a span of discourse.
" She goes on to say that deviations from the default (topic) case will be signalled by the use of a full NP.
 As we have seen (e.
g.
 example (3) above) such deviations can be signalled as well by the use of a focussed pronoun.
 If the two pronoun functions discussed above are associated with differences In processing, it may be that both the Reference Search Hypothesis and the TopicStability Hypothesis are correct.
 Reference search may be used in processing focussed pronouns and topicstability may be used in processing nonfocussed pronouns.
 Assuming that executing a reference search is a more complex task than assignment of reference to a discourse topic, this dual process hypothesis predicts that processing focussed pronouns should be more difficult than processing nonfocussed pronouns.
 This hypothesis would also seem to predict that no differences should be found in processing between sentences which both have nonfocussed pronouns.
 Previous work, however, has found' such differences.
 Caramazza and Gupta (1979), for example, found differences in reaction time to naming the NP coreferential with a nonfocussed (it would have been unstressed had it been presented luditorily) pronoun depending on pragmatic and syntactic factors.
 According to the TopicStability Hypothesis, these differences should not have been found.
 However, the prediction made by this hypothesis depends on the fact that unstressed pronouns must refer to the discourse topic.
 Sentences presented in isolation, as in Carmazza and Gupta's study, may be ambiguous with respect to discourse topic.
 If more than one entity is eligible to serve as the discourse topic, then a reference searcn might be necessary even for an unstressed pronoun, although the number of entities to be examined might be smaller than for a focussed pronoun.
 Thus, these results do not seem to provide a serious counterexample to our proposal.
 The only previous study to directly address the question of comprehension differences between focussed and nonfocussed pronouns is Maratsos (1973).
 He found that focussed pronouns of one type (thst is the roleswitch type seen in (20)), were more difficult for children to comprehend than unstressed pronouns.
 He interprets this difference to the operation of a role stability strategy that tells the child to try to maintain the same actors in syntactic and semantic roles.
 Obviously this interpretation resembles the TopicStability hypothesis, in that in the TopicStability hypothesis the listener is maintaining the same entity as a discourse topic.
 In the dualprocess hypothesis, as well as in Maratsos's hypothesis, stress is seen as signalling change, however, the fact that some types of focussed pronouns do not signal grammatical or semantic role change (such as the example in (7)) shows that Maratsos's characterization is not quite accurate for a wider sample of focussed pronouns than the ones he used in his experiment.
 In light of the results that Maratsos obtained, we expected that the processing of focussed pronouns, assumed to be of the reference search type, would be more difficult than the processing of unfocussed pronouns, assumed to be of the topicstability type.
 We conducted a pilot study to test the hypothesis that there are different kinds of processing for stressed and unstressed pronouns.
 In this study, 15 subjects listened to a set of 40 short discourses, 20 experimental and 20 filler.
 The experimental discourses occurred in two identical forms, except with a biasing context that made a focussed or nonfocussed pronoun appropriate.
 In both forms of the discourse the referent of the pronoun was the same.
 For example: (21) A.
 Did Bill say who would be late? B.
 Yes, after I called him up.
 Bill said that HE would be late.
 126 (22) A.
 Did Bill say whether he would be late? B.
 Yes, after I called him up, Bill said that he would be late.
 After listening to the sentences, the subjects answered true or false to a statement about a part of the sentence that had nothing to do with the pronominal reference.
 After (21) or (22), for example, the subjects might hear: (23) True or false: Bill called me up.
 On the assumption that a difficulty in pronoun processing would lead to a general degradation in performance in comprehending all parts of the sentence, we predicted that more errors would be made in the sentences with focussed pronouns in them.
 We found that subjects did not made significantly more errors in either condition.
 We believe, however, that this result is due to the fact that the task isiimply too easy.
 We found that subjects performed at about the 90% level of correctness for both focussed and nonfocussed pronoun discourses, and most of these errors were due to two stimulus discourses that were difficult for other reasons.
 We also asked the subjects to judge whether they felt the following statement was easy, medium, or difficult to answer, and found no difference between focussed and nonfocussed conditions in this measurement either.
 We did find that judgements of difficulty were not consistently related to performance.
 Very often subjects thought that the statement was easy to confirm when they gave the wrong answer.
 A future experiment will provide a more sensitive test of this hypothesis.
 This experiment will auditorily present subjects with discourses containing pronouns of the types we are interested in, and measure reaction time to naming the referent of the pronoun.
 This would be similar to the procedure used in Caramazza and Gupta (1979), except that they used a visual presentation.
 If our hypothesis is correct, then reaction time to naming the referent of a focussed pronoun should be longer than reaction time to fining the referent of a nonfocussed pronoun.
 If there is no difference in reaction times, we would conclude that the reference search process is used for all pronoun processing.
 Note that the TopicStability hypothesis cannot be correct (at least for adults), for all pronouns, since it can lead to the wrong referent's being selected for some focussed pronouns, as illustrated in (19) and (20).
 On the other hand, reference search could lead to the correct referent for all pronouns.
 We have suggested that pronouns can be divided into two types on the basis of their linguistic characteristics, and we have suggested that people may be able to t;ke advantage of the severe restrictions on what the antecedent of an unstressed pronoun can be in processing.
 No differences were detected in a pilot study, but an additional experiment is proposed that will use a more sensitive test of processing difficulty than the one used in the first experiment.
 References Akmajian, A.
, and Jackendoff, R.
 (1970).
 Coreferentiality and stress.
 Linguistic Inquiry, I, 124126.
 Caramazza, A.
, and Gupta, S.
 (1979).
 The roles of topicalization, parallel function, and verb semantics in the interpretation of pronouns.
 Linguistics, U , 497518.
 Chafe, RTlT (1974).
 Language and consciousness.
 Language, 50, 111133.
 Clark, H.
H.
, and Clark, E.
V.
 (1977).
 Psychology of Language.
 New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc.
 Clark, H.
H.
, and Sengul, C.
J.
 (1979).
 In search of referents for nouns and pronouns.
 Memory and Cognition, 7̂ , 3541.
 Gundel,"T! (1980).
 ZeroNP anaphora in Russian: A case of topicprominence.
 In Kreiman, J.
, and Ojeda, A.
E.
, eds.
.
 Papers from the Parasession on Pronouns and Anaphora.
 Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society, 139146.
 Halliday, M.
A.
K.
, and Hasan, R.
 (1976).
 Cohesion in English.
 London: Longman.
 KarmiloffSmith, A.
 (1980).
 Psychological processes underlying pronominalization and nonpronominalization in chidren's connected discourse.
 In Kreiman, J.
, and Ojeda, A.
E.
, eds.
.
 Papers from the Parasession on Pronouns and Anaphora.
 Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society, 231250.
 Li, C.
N.
, and Thompson, S.
A.
 (1979).
 Thirdperson pronouns and zeroanaphora in Chinese discourse.
 In Givon, T.
, ed.
.
 Syntax and Semantics 12: Discourse and Syntax.
 New York: Academic Press, 311335.
 Linde, C.
 Focus of attention and the choice of pronouns in discourse.
 (1979).
 In Givon, T.
, ed.
.
 Syntax and Semantics 12: Discourse and Syntax.
 New York: Academic Press, 337354.
 Maratsos, M.
P.
 The effects of stress on the understanding of pronominal coreference in children.
 Journal of Psycholinguistic Research.
 2 (1973), 18.
 127 The Natural Natural Lanquaqe Understander Henry Hajnburqer, UCI and NSF and Stephen Grain, U of Texas Ttiis study of natural languaqo comprehension by natural understanding systems (children) is based on a procedural analysis represented in the form of a progranming language.
 To clarify what is coqnitively required for a child to respond appropriately to certain expressions in English, we show how these forms can be translated into procedures in a highlevel progranminq language.
 It is then possible to discuss two kinds of difficulties a natural language form can present to the listener: (i) incompatibility of the form with its associated procedure and (ii) complexity of that procedure.
 An example of procedure complexity is the nesting of loops, whereas a contributor to incompatibility is a word or contiguous ohrase that corresponds to separated pieces of the procedure.
 Wc shall present evidence of both types of difficulty frcn experiments with children and will compare the predictions of our procedural view with those of a loss detailed syntactic explanation that has been advanced for a subset of the phenomena.
 Many cognitive tasks can be expressed either as a natural language contnand or as a programming language procedure.
 In many tasks requiring some elementary mathematical kjiowledqe (e.
q.
, counting), the cognitive procedure appears to be substantially more complex than the syntactic structure of the conmand.
 In such tasks, an explanation of children's difficulties can be pursued more profitably in the realm of cognitive procedure than of syntactic structure or parsing.
 To take a particularly simple example, the verb 'count' has the capacity to serve as either a transitive or an intransitve verb, but it is probably never the first such verb encountered by a child; compare 'let's eat' and 'eat your cracker.
' Therefore the transition from intransitive use of 'count' to its transitive use involves no syntactic innovation for a child.
 Put despite being syntactically ordinary, 'count' presents complexities both in its procedure and in translation to that procedure.
 Just ask the next threeyearold you see to count, and then to count a few objects.
 Chances are good that you will get errors on the transitive (latter) task but not on the intransitive one.
 A look at these errors will give some perspective on what a correct procedure must do.
 Oie kind of attempt at transitive counting involves blithely swinging a finger past the objects to be counted, while apparently counting essentially intransitively, with no attempt to coordinate individual objects to individual nuntvbers.
 A somewhat more sophisticated performance has the finger stopping at some or all of the objects, but in imperfect coordination with the numbers.
 TTiese misperformances, we believe, arise and persist not out of ignorance of the lexical item 'count' or the associated data structure of positive integers, nor from the syntax of transitive verbs (which, it was suggested above, has already been learned), but because of difficulty inherent in forming a correct procedure for the task of transitive counting.
 Consider procedures i and ii, intended to represent correct procedures for the two kinds of counting, expressed at a coarse enough grain that individual statements can be taken as havinq theoretical content.
 Ttie tokens are intended to be more or less selfexplanatory.
 In the interest of simplicity, no mention is made of initialization, stored data, or output.
 i procedure: 'Count.
' repeat Ttie procedure runs next number through successive numbers until fail until there are no more.
 ii procedure: 'Count them.
' repeat next object At each cycle, the next next number object and number are until fail noted.
 For i to bo utilized in forming ii, it is necessary to insert new material, specifically 'next object,' into the loop already present in i.
 TTius one approach to accounting for the difficulty posed by the transitive case is to hypothesize that breaking into a loop is a difficult or lowpriority move for acquisition or comprehension.
 A related view is implicit in iii where it can be seen that a single word, 'count,' corresponds to two separate pieces of procedure.
 Ttiis phenomenon can appropriately be called translational discontinuity in the sense that it pertains to the relationship betweeen two representations.
 Since it arises in the translation from a (very) highlevel language (English) to a lesshighlevel language (of procedures), it can also be called a compiling discontinuity.
 Note that there is no discontinuity in the phrase structure of the language form itself.
 iii procedure: 'Count .
.
.
' repeat next number until fail To take these ideas a step further, consider the phrase 'the second green ball.
' Roeper (1972) found that many children interpret this phrase as if 'second' and 'green' each modify the noun in the same way, that is, as if the phrase meant something like 'the ball which has the properties of being both green and second.
' Matthei (1978) expresses this observation as a distinction in syntactic phrase structure, assigning the adult interpretation the phrase structure '(second (green ball))', and the nonadult interpretation '(second green ball).
' TVie idea of using syntactic phrase structure in this way to encode semantic interpretations must rely on scm& assumptions about how semantics relates to syntactic structure, for example, a compositional semantics tied to the syntactic phrase marker.
 In any case, no such phrasestructural distinction is possible for phrases like 'second ball,' for which Ttetthei found substantial corresponding errors: 36% of responses (four and fiveyearolds, mostly) interpreted 'second ball' as 'the one that is both second and a ball,' as oppostxi to the 52% who made the similar error on the example above that had an adjective in the phrase.
 128 Pursuing the procedural approach with this construction, we new find not only ccnpilinq discontinuity but also nested loops.
 These aspects of the procedure appear both with and without the adjective, as can be seen with reference to iv and v, again emitting initialization and any data structures.
 iv procedure: 'socxxid ball' repeat repeat next C3b]ect until pred ball next number until pred two V procedure: 'second green hall' repeat repeat next object until pred qreon pred ball next number until pred two The task environment is a display of several objects in a rcw, with a lefttoright ordering clearly connunicated in advance.
 The child is asked to 'take the second ball' frcn a display of balls and boxes, or to 'take the second green ball' frcn a display of red and green balls.
 To take the former case, suppose that the first object is a box.
 Then even if the second object is a ball, so that it is both second and a ball, it is still not the second ball.
 Procedure iv correctly makes this distinction (which eludes so many children) by means of nested loops in which successive objects are checked for ballhood in the inner loop and counting proceeds in the outer only in case the current object is a ball.
 With an adjective present the appropriate procedure is v, which is like iv except that the inner loop is exited only in the event that two successive predicates are satisfied.
 Rather than introduce an 'and' operator in v, we have allcwed the possibility of multiple exit tests, thereby making conjunction look simpler than disjunction.
 Even so, one still should expect the extra predicate to add some processing burden and indeed the phrase in v does lead to more errors than that in iv.
 Furthermore the outer predicate should also impose a processing burden.
 Suppose we remove it and interpret the absence of any exit test as signifying 'repeat forever or until system breakdown (say by failure of a 'next' operator).
' What is then left of v is a procedure for 'count the qreen balls,' which does indeed appear to cause children less difficulty than 'second green hall.
' (Matthei regarded the two as cognitively equivalent).
 Not only do the words 'second' and "ball' together translate into nested loops, but they do so in a discontinuous manner.
 This is so because 'second' is responsible for the outer loop and 'ball' (in iv) is responsible for the inner loop.
 Worse yet, the programing statement 'next obiect' is implicit in the counting loop, so that under an absolutely lefttoright control structure, the state of (cognitive) affairs after 'second' is processed would be as in vi.
 Processing the remainder of the phrase requires, on this model, locating 'next object' in the existing loop, using it ('next object') in constructing a new loop, and finally nesting the new loop in the existing one.
 vi procedure: 'second .
.
.
' repeat next ob]ect next number until pred two It is our view that these ccnplexities are what make such phrases difficult for children.
 Not only does this account indicate where corplexities lie, but in addition it provides an account of how specific errors can arise from a straightforward attempt to avoid breaking into loops and incurring cotnpilinq discontinuity.
 Suppose that a child simply taclcs on the appropriate test ('pred ball') at the end of vi to form vii.
 This is possible if the convention introduced in v, above, is used again here: allowing a sequence of 'pred' statements as a compound exit test.
 TTiis ploy yields precisely tlie observed incorrect result whenever it is possible (when the second object is a ball), and an infinite loop otherwise.
 vii procedure: 'second ball' (incorrect interpretation) repeat next object next number until pred two pred ball To gain perspective on the earlier examples and raise some new issues, consider the phrase 'second biggest ball.
' Here the ordering along which 'second' is to be counted is based not on position but on size.
 This ordering must be at least partially determined by the subject, using an appropriate algorithm.
 Tlie usual sorting algorithms (ripple, bubble.
 Shell, etc.
) are probably poor motiels both because they are severely nonparallel and because they provide a complete ordering where only a partial one is needed.
 In addition to some sorting, this task demands menory of some order relationships that have been established by that sorting.
 These size relationships in shortterm memory must be used in concert with the ordering of positive integers held in longterm meinory.
 This requirement is not present for the earlier tasks since the positional ordering is continually available from the display.
 In our experiments the display has been a card with a row of pictured objects, so subjects cannot create a physical order.
 If separate physical objects were used, then a child's sequence of moves might reveal use of a specific sorting algorithm.
 Results of pilot experiments suggest that 'second biggest ball' is, as one would expect from these considerations, an extremely difficult phrase to interpret.
 We devised the most straightforward we could that would test comprehension of this phrase; all the objects were identical except in size; all but two were of the same snail size; the remaining two were both substantially larger than the snaller ones, adjacent to each other and noticeably different from each other in size; neither was in second position.
 In experiments so far the error rate has been 80%; we will report more comprehensive testing at the conference.
 129 It is possible to set up more oonplex displays in which different miscxjmprehensions load to distinct choices as response.
 With balls and boxes of various sizes there exist arrays in which, say, one object is both second biggest and a ball but is not the second biggest ball; or in which the second ball is the biggest; etc.
 A welter of possibilities exists for testing the way in which ordinals, superlatives, relative adjectives, absolute adjectives, nouns and relative clauses are canprehended by children and what the course of development looJcs like, in terms of the kinds of procedures we have posited here.
 Such developmental sequences are, in turn, the raw material for theories of an acquisition device.
 130 Why Do Children Say "Goed"? A Computer Model of Child Generation Hallory Selfridge Department of EE and CS University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 1.
0 Introduction An important question in modelling child language generation is why children say regular forms of irregular words, such as "goed", (Clark and Clark, 1978) during development, although they never hear them.
 Three other general characteristics of children's generation also require explanation.
 First, Benedict's (1976) work suggests clearly that comprehension of various aspects of language precede the generation of those aspects.
 Second, the length of the utterances children say becomes generally longer as development proceeds (Bloom, 1973).
 Third, Wetstone and Friedlander (1973) suggest that first children say things in the wrong order, and then say things in the correct order.
 In order to address these issues, this paper explores the hypothesis that learning to talk is driven by learning to understand.
 This hypothesis begins by assuming that the principal effect of learning to understand is the development of the lexicon as additional words are learned and their "definitions" are refined and modified.
 It further assumes that the language generation process is not learned, but is an innate part of a child's cognitive repertoire.
 Finally, it states that the ability to generate grows as the lexicon develops during the development of comprehension.
 The hypothesis predicts that a computer model which incorporated it would display the characteristics described above.
 CHILD (Selfridge, 1980) was initially developed to model a subset of the development of comprehension about a limited domain in a child between the ages of one and two years, using contextbased inference and learning rules to build a dictionary aocessable to a conceptual analyzer (Birnbaum and Selfridge, 1979).
 New words were added to the dictionary, the meanings of ones it had learned were refined, and syntactic information on how to combine word meanings were stored under appropriate words.
 Meaning was modelled using Conceptual Dependency (Schank, 1973), while syntactic knowledge was represented using Sequential Structure (Selfridge, I98O) which encodes the utterance position of the filler of a slot of a word meaning.
 Thus CHILD'S learning was based upon meaning, with syntactic knowledge indexed upon this meaning.
 CHILD has now been equipped with a generator (Cullingford, Krueger, and Selfridge, I98I), which has access to the dictionary built up during comprehension learning.
 CHILD now learns to generate in the same limited domain, and offers explanations for the psychological phenomena described.
 In particular, although CHILD does not yet say "goed", it provides a precise account of how it could be given experiences which would lead it to say "goed".
 2.
0 Learning to Generate Children speak in many different situations.
 CHILD only generates language in one of these, that in which a child describes something observed (Halliday, 1975).
 The user teaches CHILD to understand by providing utterances in situations in which CHILD can infer their meaning.
 To demonstrate the development of generation, the user provides CHILD with a Conceptual Dependency concept, simulating visual input.
 When given such a concept, CHILD attempts to generate it.
 The following sequence of utterances interspersed with transitions summarizes the development of CHILD'S generation capacity, and is drawn from a full run of CHILD during which it both learns to comprehend and generate.
 The statements referring to CHILD "learning" meaning and syntax summarize the learning of comprehension described in Selfridge (I98O).
 In order to show development, CHILD has been supplied with the same concept to generate repeatedly: the concept for "the parent puts the ball on the table", (PTRANS ACTOR (PARENT1) OBJECT (BALL1) TO (TOP VAL (TABLED)).
 CHILD knows no words CHILD says "urn" CHILD learns meaning of "ball" CHILD says "ball" CHILD learns meaning of "put" CHILD says "ball put" CHILD learns meaning of "table" CHILD says "table ball put" CHILD learns syntax of "put" CHILD says "put ball table" CHILD learns meaning of "on" CHILD says "put ball table on" CHILD learns syntax of "on" CHILD says "put ball on table" This progression shows that CHILD'S generation does correspond to the data described earlier.
 First, CHILD certainly does learn to generate after it learns to understand.
 Second, the length of its utterances does indeed grow.
 Third, the ability to generate structurally correct utterances follows the ability to generate Incorrect utterances.
 3.
0 Why Would CHILD Say "Goed"? There are several properties of CHILD which would lead it to say "goed".
 First, its dictionary is ordered and the first word found during lookup which matcties the concept being generated is used.
 Second, words are not forgotten and removed from the dictionary, but they may be "coveredup" by words learned later.
 Third, both new words and words whose meaning has been modified are placed at the top of the dictionary where they will be found first during lookup.
 The following developmental progression accounts for why children say "goed" according to the CHILD model.
 Each of the proposed learning events can be modelled by CHILD'S existing learning rules.
 The first stage is that in which children learn "go" and "went" as meaning PTRANS with the TIME slot containing PRESENT and PAST respectivly.
 The order in the dictionary is, top to bottom, "went" and "go".
 "Went" is on the top because it is presumably learned later than "go.
" At this stage the child will use these words correctly, since when he wants to generate a PTRANS with TIME as PAST he will lookup "went" directly, and when he wants to generate PTRANS with TIME as PRESENT, he will find "go" directly.
 The second stage occurs when he learns "ed" as a separate lexical item, whose meaning is the filler PAST.
 This is learned during comprehension in the 131 same way other words are learned, and as a result "ed" is placed on the dictionary, whose order is now "ed", "went", "go".
 Although "ed" is now in the dictionary, the child desiring to generate PTRANS with TIME either PAST or PRESENT will still use "go" and "went", since dictionary lookup matches on the root concept, and the meaning of "ed" doesn't natch PTRANS.
 At the third stage, the child learn that the meaning of "go" does not include the PRESENT filler of the time slot, perhaps because the child is learning about "go" and the future tense.
 He must also learn that the filler of the TIME slot of "go" must follow "go", perhaps because he learns to understand "go ing".
 Learning a modified meaning of "go" results in "go" being placed on the front of the dictionary, and its order is now "go", "ed", "went".
 At this stage, the child desiring to generate PTRANS with TIME as PRESENT will find the meaning of "go" matching this PTRANS, and will then search the dictionary to generate the PRESENT subconcept.
 Since there is nothing there, he will use "go" alone.
 However, to generate PTRANS with TIME as PAST, he will again find "go" matching the PTRANS, and will search the dictionary to express the PAST subooncept.
 This time, however, he will find "ed", and will thus generate "goed".
 The fourth stage occurs when the child hears "went" again, perhaps in ordinary discourse or as a parental correction to "goed".
 This correction results in "went" being placed in the front of the dictionary, whose order is now "went", "go", "ed".
 At this point, the child will use "go" for PTRANS with TIME as PRESENT, "ed" is available for expressing the PAST time for ordinary action words, but he will cease using "goed", since he finds "went" expresses PTRANS with TIME as PAST direoty.
 l).
0 Conclusions CHILD offers an explanation for the psychological data described earlier.
 Oeneration follows comprehension because generation cannot occur until comprehension learning adds words to the dictionary.
 Length of utterances increases because the number of words available to express a concept increases during comprehension learning.
 Utterances are generated with incorrect structure before they are generated with proper structure because syntax is indexed under word meanings, word meanings are learned before their syntax, and word meanings without syntax are available to the generator before word meanings with syntax.
 In particular, this paper proposes a specific explanation of why children say "goed": because generation is driven by understanding, because the dictionary is ordered and the first word found matching the concept to be generated is used, and because new words and words with refined meanings are placed on the top of the dictionary.
 This account of why children say "goed" makes four specific predictions.
 First, since "went" is still in the dictionary even though the child says "goed", the child will still understand the utterances containing "went" during the stage at which he is generating "goed".
 Second, since "went" was relearned as a result of an experience specifically with "went", this model predicts that a child will continue to say "goed" at least until he has heard "went" again; that is, after he begins to use "goed", he will never say "went" before he hears "went" again.
 Third, since corrections or relearning are specific to individual words, the transition from the third to fourth stages for various irregular words will occur individually.
 That is, if the child is saying "goed" and "runned", learning "went" again will not result in the child also saying "ran".
 Rather, a specific experience with "ran" is needed.
 Fourth, this model predicts that a child will never say "goed" until after he has learned to understand "go" in a tense other than the present, because this experience teaches him that the TIME slot under "go" is empty, as is needed to say "goed".
 Acknowledgements Dr.
 Roger Schank's assistance in this work was invaluable.
 Dr.
 Richard Cullingford has made many valuable suggestions, and Dr.
 Katherine Nelson has provided many insights into problems of modelling child language learning.
 Larry Birnbaum, Marie Bienkowski and Jamie Callan have contributed both ideas and criticisms.
 Bibliography Benedict, H.
 (1976).
 Language Comprehension in 10 to 16 Monthold Infants.
 (thesis) Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.
 Birnbaum, L.
, and Selfrldge, M.
 (1981).
 in Inside Artificial Intelligence: Five Programs plus Miniatures.
 Schank R.
 and Riesbeck C.
K.
 (eds.
), Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, Bloom, L.
 , 1973.
 Hague.
 One Word at a Time.
 Mouton, The Bruner, J.
S.
, Goodnow, J.
 J.
, and Austin, G.
A.
, (1956).
 A Study of Thinking.
 John Wiley and Sons, New York Clark, E.
V.
 and Clark, H.
H.
 , (1978).
 and Language.
 Harcourt Brace Jovanovioh.
 Psychology Cullingford, F.
E.
, Krueger, H.
W.
, and Selfridge, M.
 (1981) A Picture and a Thousand Words: Automated Explanations as a Component of a ComputerAided Design System.
 Forthcoming.
 Halliday, M.
A.
K.
, (1975).
 Learning How ta Mean: Explorations in Ihe Development of Language Edward Arnold, London.
 Schank, R.
 C.
, (1973).
 Identification of Conceptualizations Underlying Natural Language.
 In R.
 C.
 Schank and K.
 M.
 Colby (eds.
) Computer Models of Thought and Language W.
H.
 Freeman and Co.
, San Fransisco.
 Selfridge, M.
 (1980).
 A Process Model of Language Acquisition.
 Computer Science Technical Report 172, Yale University, New Haven, Ct.
 Westone, H.
 and Friedlander, (1973).
 The Effect of Word Order on Young Children's Responses to Simple Questions and Commands.
 Child Dev.
 '4l|:731471)0 Winston, P.
 (1975).
 Learning Structural Descriptions from Examples.
 In P.
H.
 Winston (ed.
) The Psychology of Computer Vision.
 McGrawHill, New York.
 132 FIVE EXPERIMENTS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE EARLY INFANT OBJECT CONCEPT BY George F.
 Luger, University of New Mexico Department of Computer Science & T.
G.
R.
 Brower & Jennifer G.
 Wishart, University of Edinburgh Department of Psychology Abstract A computational model is proposed for the early stages of development of the object concept in infants.
 Stages in development are represented as a sequence of grammars or rewrite rules parsing a set of perceptual phenomena.
 The infants' changes between developmental stage; can be described by differences between the grarrmar rules modelling each stage.
 The program replicates five Bower et al studies on the development of the object concept and reaffirms the primacy of rest and motion parameters as explanatory invariants in early object concept development.
 Forty years ago, Piaget first observed and described the problems infants have in understanding the nature of objects (Piaget, 1936, 1937, 1946).
 Piaget identified six invariant stages of development through which the infant comes to cope with and understand external objects.
 One alternative theory of object concept development which has been proposed is the identity theory of Bower and Wishart (Bower, 1967, 1972, 1974; Wishart, 1979).
 'Identity theory' believes the infant's problem in understanding the nature of objects to lie in discovering the spatiotemporal relationships which underpin the identity of any object.
 While Piaget believed the young infant to have no true differentiated awareness of either self or objects in the first year of life.
 Bower and Wishart believe a basic understanding of the independent existence of both to be present at a very early stage, possibly even at birth.
 The infant is seen as having difficulty, not in differentiating himself and his actions from other activity in the external world, but rather in understanding the unique nature of objects themselves.
 The identity hypothesis can be summarised in the form of a series of three conceptual rules (Bower, 1974, 1981; Wishart, 1979) which can cover all six stages of search behavior found in standard Piagetian object permanence testing situations and can also explain the otherwise puzzling behavior shown by infants in other objectrelated tasks.
 (See e.
g.
 Bower & Wishart, 1973, Butterworth, 1977, Wishart & Bower, 1981).
 While it is the eventual aim of our research to develop a program to cover the entire sequence of object concept development, this paper will report only our initial work on modelling Stages I  II of that development, a period which, according to Bower and Wishart, sees the development of the first two conceptual rules for attributing identity to successive appearances of any object.
 These rules can be formulated as a sequence of grammars or rewrite rules that translate perceptual phenomena into sets of behavioral responses.
 The perceptual phenomena will remain constant throughout the period of testing, i.
e.
, across the running of the sequence of grammars that represents the early stages of development.
 This paper hypothesizes that the symbolic output of the featural and motion detection mechanisms is available to the cognizing subject.
 This model offers no explanation of the physiological origins of such phenomena, but rather emphasizes the descriptive adequacy of the internal symbol structures and the interpretive adequacy of the cognizing subjects' manipulation of such symbol structures.
 Further, the changes in the computational rules expressing the interpretive adequacy of infants at various stages in development will offer explanation of that development.
 Each experiment of this study is composed of a sequence of "snapshots" representing the physical situation according to a time parameter.
 Snapshots represent objects by themselves, partially or totally obscured by occluders, and replaced by other objects.
 An example of such a set of snapshots may be seen in Figure 1.
 This figure represents a subset of the snapshots taken from Experiment 5 of Section II, where S(n) indicates the time parameter.
 A set of symbols represents each snapshot and a set of rules characterizes the grammar 133 that interprets each sequence of snapshots Each rule of a grammar represents a different interpretive capacity of the subject such as to locate an object symbol structure within a fixed radius r of a spatial position (x,y,z).
 The grammars of this model are designed to implement the rules outlined by Wishart (1979).
 An implicit assumption is that the infant is motivated to maintain contact throughout the event S3qui?nce with the object he/she initially identifies as interesting.
 This computational description of the object permanence phenomenon is written in PROLOG (Warren and Periera, 1977; Warren, 1979).
 The action of PROLOG is of a unification algorithm operating on a set of record structures.
 These structures are of two general forms: a set of facts and a set of inference rules.
 The PROLOG facts are used to makeup the object structure for the description of each snapshot.
 For example the facts loc (OBJN, X, Y, Z, T), color (OBJM, CL T), and size (OBJN, SZ, T) indicate OBJECTN has color CL, size SZ and location (X,Y,Z) at time T.
 The combination of these and other descriptors make up each snapshot of the experiment.
 The grammar rules interpret these object structures.
 PROLOG rules are of the form "AhB,C,D," which may be described procedurally as "to accomplish A attempt to accomplish B and C and D.
" B, C, and D may be facts (checked to be true) or may themselves be rules that lead to the proof or performance of B, C, and D.
 For example, Grammar 1 says to test for a permanent* object at a location look for: 1) An object structure within a fixed radius r of the location.
 2) Check if previous snapshots would indicate a permanent object should be at this location.
 3) Test the object structure for interest (parallax).
 4) Check whether the object structure is intact (that is whether it or any of its boundaries are occluded), and finally, 5) Based on this object structure look to an appropriate position for the next object structure.
 The grammar of the second developmental stage is similar to the grammar for stage one.
 The essential difference is a rule called twice by the grammar for the object structure of each snapshot.
 This rule represents the older infants ability to check different perceptual values such as size and color between snapshots.
 (Luger et al, 1981).
 II.
 Five Experiments In this section five experiments will be considered and the action of the computer model in these situations described.
 The model is in two parts, each representing a stage of development of the infant.
 The first part.
 Grammar 1, represents the earliest stage of development modelling Rule 1; Grammar 2 models Rule 2 (Wishart, 1979).
 In the conclusion, the results of the computational model run on the experimental situations will be compared with the results of infants tested in the same situations.
 •Although this paper does not elaborate on the distinctions between object permanence and object identity interpretations of object concept behaviors, the authors' bias towards identity theory should be made clear.
 A basic notion of object permanence (i.
e.
 of the continued existence of objects when unperceived) is assumed to be present from very early on (Bower, 1967), according to identity theory, it is the steplike discovery of the precise spatiotemporal nature of that existence which lies behind the sequence of errors found in standard object concept tasks, not the development of a notion of permanence per se.
 A.
 The Experiments Experiment 1.
 (Bower, Broughton & Moore, 1971; Bower & Paterson, 1973).
 An object, interesting to an infant, is moving on a straight path in full view of the infant.
 The object then stops in full view.
 The young infant (Stages I II) typically pauses with the object for almost half a second and then continues to follow the objects' former path across the field of view (movement error).
 The older (Stage III) infant pauses with the stopped object, looks onto the path the object no longer follows, and then goes back tothe stopped object.
 Experiment 2.
 (Bower, Broughton & Moore, 1971; Bower & Paterson, 1973).
 An object is at rest in full view of the infant.
 It is displaced and follows a fixed path at constant velocity.
 The younger infant follows the displaced object but then looks back to the position of the original stationary object (place error).
 The older infant pauses and then follows the path of the displaced object.
 134 Experiment 3.
 (Bower, 1974) An object moves along a path.
 It is replaced in midpath by another object that continues to move along the path.
 The young infant is not disturbed by the nidpath substitution.
 The older infants are confused moving their eyes back and forth between places of different objects.
 Experiment 4.
 (Bower, Broughton & Moore, 1971) An object moves across the field of view and behind a occluder.
 A different object reaopears on the other side of the occluder.
 The young infant follows the path of the object and continues to track the changed object when it appears.
 The older infant reacts to the new object when it reappears and looks back to the occluder.
 Experiment 5.
 (Bower & Paterson, 1973) An object moves across the field of view.
 It stops on one side for a brief period of time and then moves back in the opposite direction stopping in its original position again for a brief time.
 After repeating this sequence of moves four times it goes off in the opposite direction.
 See snapshots of Experiment 5 in Figure 1.
 The younger infant continues to have movement and place errors as the object moves and stops and moves off again.
 With repeated exposure to the sequence, she may adopt a place to place strategy of jumping to the object's next stopping point as soon as it begins to move off from its present position.
 This strategy is only briefly successful since it cannot cope with the final change in direction.
 The older infant is not disturbed by the movement and stopping in either direction.
 s(i) D S(2) D s(3) n s(i5)a S(16)D S(17)D , S(29) Q • S(30) • D S(31) • n S(8) a s(9) .
 • S(10) " D S(22) a S(23) a S(24) •• • S(36)Q Figure 1.
 Snapshots from the motion and rest pattern that makes up Experiment 5.
 B.
 The Results Experiment 1.
 Grammar 1 identifies an interesting object, say OBJl, and associates this object with a path across the field of view.
 When OBJl stoos moving Grammar 1 continues to follow the former path, not finding an object it looks back to the now stationary object, calls it 0BJ2, and looks back searching again for OBJl on its original path.
 Grammar 2 in this situation identifies OBJl as interesting and follows it.
 When it stops.
 Grammar 2 continues on path and then looks back to the stopped object, notices its' similarity in size and shape to the original OBJl and continues to look at it.
 Experiment 2.
 Grammar 1 identifies an interesting object, OBJl, stationary before it.
 When the object starts to move.
 Grammar 1 follows it, looks back to its former location and then looks to the new moving object and calls it 0BJ2.
 Graimiar 2 does the same as Grammar 1 except that it recognizes the size and shape of the moving object to be the same as that of the original stationary object, and does not create a new object.
 Experiment 3.
 Grammar 1 identifies OBJl and follows its path ignoring the midpath substitution.
 Grammar 2 follows OBJl as interesting and noting the perceptual changes of the sustituted object calls this new object 0BJ2 and continues to follow it.
 Experiment 4.
 Grammar 1 sees OBJl as interesting and follows it along.
 It continues to follow the path behind the occluder and follows the path as the new object emerges.
 Grammar 1 sees only one bounded volume of space moving on a path.
 Grammar 2, noting peceptual changes sees 3 objects; the original, the occluder and the new emerged object.
 Experiment 5.
 With every movement and pause Grammar 1 sees a different object for each movement and each place.
 Grammar 2 sees only one object, the perceptual checks at each motion translation allowing transition to new motion sequences without confusion.
 III.
 Summary and Conclusions Several researchers have recently reported on computational models of preverbal children's problem solving skills (Prazdny, 1980; Young, 1976).
 The behaviors modelled in these studies are as simple as eye movements, reaching, and gross body movements.
 Modern research techniques such as video tapes, however, allow researchers to be quite comfortable with the interpretation of such motor behavior.
 Such data makes up the Bower and Wishart studies, and this is the data our program interprets.
 Grammars 1 and 2 follow fairly closely the two rules suggested by Wishart (1979).
 Grammar 2 with its perceptual checking for size, shape and color factors allows proper detection of changes between the two objects when these change, 135 and proper positing of no change when only the motion and rest factors differ.
 Thus motion and rest are established in the "identity" model as explanatory invariants of the first stages of infants' acquisition of the object concept.
 In both experiments 1 and 2, Grammar 1 identifies 2 objects, one stationary and the second in motion.
 Grammar 2 with more advanced oerceptual checking, notes the similarity of the object in motion and the object at rest and does not posit a second object.
 In experiments 3 and 4 Grammar 1 sees only one object following a fixed path.
 Grammar 2, noting perceptual differences, posits new different objects for each perceptual change in the objects.
 In experiment 5, Grammar 1 posits a new object for each path of movement and each stationary object position.
 Grammar 2 sees only one object.
 An important area for continued work is to develop a third grammar capable of interpreting object structures in more complex situations than those dealt with above, in experimental situations, for example, involving partial occlusion of an object or close spatial interaction between a number of objects.
 Bower and Wishart have posited a third conceptual rule (Rule III) to account for these final stages of the development of object understanding (Piaget's Stage VI).
 The rule states that two or more objects cannot be in the same place or on the same path of movement at the same time unless they bear a spatial relationship to each other which involves the sharing of common boundaries.
 The interpretative adequacy of this rule could be evaluated against experimental situations in which such boundary sharing occurs, as, for instance, when an object is placed on top of a platform, inside a cup or behind a screen (Wishart?.
 Bower, 1981).
 Experiments of this form make up a valuable part of the research to explore the object concept and will be the focus of the next stage of this research.
 The ultimate aim of the research will, of course, be to model the rules which produce the change upwards from one conceptual stage to the next.
 A series of costgain acceleration studies with infants is at present in progress in an attempt to produce data which will give us some insight into these mechanisms for change (Bower, 1981).
 Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank the British Medical Research Council for their generous support of this research (Research Grant No.
 G979/932/N).
 References Bower, T.
G.
R.
, 1967, "The Development of Object Permanence," Perception and Psychophysics, 2, 411418.
 Bower, T.
G.
R.
 , 1972, "Object Perception in Infants," Perception, 1, 1530.
 Bower, T.
G.
R.
, 1974, Development of Infancy, San Francisco, W.
H.
 Freeman.
 Bower, T.
G.
R.
, 1977, A Primer of Infant Development, San Francisco, W.
H.
 Freeman.
 Bower, T.
G.
R.
, 1981, Development in Infancy (2nd Edition), San Francisco, W.
H.
 Freeman.
 Bower, T.
G.
R.
, Broughton, J.
M.
, & Moore, M.
K.
, 1971, "Development of the object concept as manifested in changes in the tracking behavior in infants between 7 and 20 weeks," J.
 Exp.
 Child Psych.
, 11, 182193.
 Bower, T.
G.
R.
, & Wishart, J.
G.
, 1973, "The effects of motorskill on object permanence,: Cognition, I, 165171.
 Butterworth, G.
, "Object disappearance and error in Piaget's Stage IV task," J.
 Exp.
 Child Psych.
, 23, 391335.
 Luger, Bower & Wishart, "A Computational Model of Development of the Object Concept in Infants," Department of Computer Science Technical Report, University of New Mexicoj 1981.
 Piaget, J.
, 1936, The Origins of Intelligence in Children, London Routilege and Kegan Paul, 1953.
 (Original French edition, 1936).
 Piaget, J.
, 1937, The Construction of Reality in the Child, London, Routilege and Kegan Paul, 1954.
 (Original French edition, 1937).
 Piaget, J.
, 1946, Play, Dreams and Imitation in Childhood, New York, Norton, 1951.
 (Original French edition, 1946).
 Prazdny, S.
, 1980, "A Computational Study of a Period of Infant ObjectConcept Development," Perception, 9, 125150.
 Warren, D.
 & Periera, 1977, "PROLOG  The Language and its Implementation Compared with LISP," ACM, SIGPLAN Notices, 12(8), and SIGART Newsletter, No.
 64, 109115.
 Warren, D.
, 1979, "PROLOG and the DEC System 10," in (Michie, ed), Expert Systems in the Micro Electronic Age, Edinburgh, The University Press.
 Wishart, J.
G.
, 1979, The Development of the Object Concept in Infancy, Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh.
 Wishart, J.
G.
 & Bower, T.
G.
R.
, 1981, "A normative study of infant object concept development under three conditions of hjding," Manuscript submitted for publication.
 Young, R.
M.
, 1976, Seriation by Children: An Artificial Intelligence Analysis of a Piagetian Task, Basel, Birkhauser.
 136 ANALOGY GENERATION IN SCIENTIFIC PROBLEM SOLVING John Clement Department of Physics and Astronomy University of Massachusetts May.
 1981 A number of researchers have discussed the important role of analogical reasoning in science and education [112].
 Tills paper describes research on the spontaneous use of analogies in problem solving by scientifically trained subjects.
 This occurs when the subject first spontaneously shifts his attention to a situation B which differs in some significant way from the original problem situation A, and then tries to apply findings from B to A.
 This is difficult for many people to do, possibly because it Involves breaking out of the assumptions built up in considering the original problem.
 As a result, although spontaneous analogies are a more naturalistic phenomenon to study than provoked analogies, they are difficult to capture and record.
 However, by intentionally focusing on subjects who are known to have done creative work in the past, a nunber of such cases have been documented.
 Ten experienced problem solvers were Interviewed on a variety of problems.
 Most were videotaped.
 The subjects were advanced doctoral students and professors in technical fields.
 The findings summarized here are based on detailed protocol analyses of six of the problem solutions from this group that included the most significant uses of analogies.
 This brief paper concentrates on examples from the protocol of a single subject.
 The first finding is that: spontaneous analogies have been observed to play a significant role in the solutions of a number of scientifically trained subjects.
 Solutions have lasted up to 90 minutes and some Include reasoning patterns that are very complex.
 This complexity has led to a research focus of working toward a macrolevel theory of the dynamic processes by which analogies are generated, evaluated, and applied.
 This is an appropriate initial strategy for mapping out a complex domain of processes about which little is known.
 From transcript analyses the general hypothesis was formulated that the following processes are fundamental in making an Inference by analogy: [2] (1) Given the Initial conception A of an Incompletely understood situation, the analogous conception B ̂  generated, or "comes to mind"; (2) the analogy relation between A and B must be "confirmed"; (3) conception B must be well understood, or at least predictive; and («) the subject transfers conclusions or methods from B back to A.
 This hypothesis Is consistent with our observation that many successful solutions by analogy are not "Instant solutions".
 Analogies are often proposed tentatively, and processes (2) and (3) especially can be quite time consuming.
 The last three processes can occur In any order, and subjects are often observed to move back and forth between them several times while gradually completing each step.
 This suggests that the subjects do not use a simple, wellordered procedure for controlling their solution processes at this level.
 This paper focuses on steps (1) and (2).
 As will be shown there appear to be not one, but several ways of generating analogies.
 and several ways of confirming then.
 EXAMPLE OF A SOLUTION CONTAINING ANALOGIES Five subjects have generated analogies in thinking aloud about the following problem: (I (2) Fig.
 1 ttrtteh Spring Coils Problem.
 A weight is hung on a spring.
 The original spring is replaced with a spring made of the same kind of wire, with the same nunber of coils, but with coils that are twice as wide In diameter.
 Will the spring stretch from Its natural length, more, less, or the same amount under the same weight? (Assume the mass of the spring Is negligible compared to the mass of the weight.
) Why do you think so? This problem was given to seven subjects.
 Four attempted to relate the problem to the analogy of a bending rod, as In the following verbatim.
 condensed transcript: (1) S2: Un, I have one good idea to start with.
 It occurs to me that a spring is nothing but a rod wound up, uh, and therefore maybe I could answer the question for a rod.
 (Draws fig.
 2 ) .
 .
 .
 I have a strong Intuition, a physical imaglstic Intuition that this (rod a) will bend a lot more than that (rod b) will.
 In fact, the intuition is confirmed by taking it to the limiting case.
 It becomes intuitively obvious to me that as one moves the weight closer and closer to the fulcrum that the thing will not bend at all.
 a Fig.
 2 Fig.
 3 S2 goes on to Infer that if the rod situation is truly analogous, the wider spring will stretch farther.
 Here the subject Is able to achieve a high degree of certainty about the behavior of the rods (process 3 above).
 He reports doing this on the basis of what he calls physical Intuition and by thinking about an extreme case, giving us reason to suspect that he Is using some type of imaglstic simulation process.
 But he is uncertain as to whether he can confirm the idea that the spring and the rod are analogous.
 (2) S2: But it occurs to me something clearly wrong with because.
.
.
its slope [the bending steadily Increase as you.
.
.
 point of attachment, whereas that there's that metaphor rod's] would went away from the In a [stretched] spring, the slope of the spiral Is constant.
.
.
 I don't see how that could make the bow go away; Just to wind it [the rod] up.
 Damn It! [13] He spends a large part of his H5 minute solution trying to resolve this issue.
 This transcript and others indicate that processes 1 through H above can indeed take place separately.
 S2 has apparently completed processes 1, 3, and n so far.
 137 METHODS FOR CONFIRMING ANALOGY REUTIONS.
 Determining a match between key relationships In both situations Ti the first and most obvious method for confirming analogy relations (process 2 above) [5].
 Thus subject S2 above is worried because he cannot obtain a match between the changing slope In a bending rod and the constant slope In a stretched spring.
 However, other confirmation methods are also possible.
 Confirmation via bridging analogies.
 Rather than throwing out the rod analogy, S2 proceeded to generate a second related analogy: the "zigzag spring" shown In fig.
 3.
 Such subjects are observed to generate an Intermediate ease when they refer to a situation that has aspects In common with two previous situations A and B.
 It Is hypothesized that S2 attempts here to form a cognitive bridging analogy which links his conceptual frameworks for the rod situation and the original spring situation.
 Figure U shows how such a bridging analogy can be effective [2].
 The link labeled 1 represents the initial tentative analogy relation conjectured to exist between conceptions A and B.
 Here A is the poorly understood Initial problem situation and B is a well understood situation.
 Inadequately vs.
 wellunderstood conceptions are represented by dotted vs.
 solid squares, respectively, and tentative vs.
 confirmed analogy relations are represented by dotted vs.
 solid links between squares, respectively.
 Figure 4 shows how the subject might establish a confirmed link between A and B by bridging back to conception A via conception C.
 If the analogy links (2) and (3) are confirmed (with respect to the same salient relationships between variables), then A can become well understood and become analogous to B, since under the above conditions, A being analogous to C and C being analogous to B means that A is analogous to B.
 We call this analogical transitivity.
 It should be emphasized that since "confirmed" generally means "intuitively compelling" rather than "proven" in this context, analogical transitivity is considered a form of plausible reasoning which does not lead to conclusions carrying the force of a logical implication.
 This diagramming system also allows one to construct macrolevel "maps" of hypothesized cognitive processes occurring during complex solutions involving many analogies.
[3] < Fig.
 4 A second bridge.
 Unfortunately, at this point the subject still could not reconcile the bending going on in the zigzag spring with the lack of change in slope in the original helical spring (link 3 is unconfirmed), so his initial attempt at a bridge failed.
 However, he later generates a second, more successful attempt at a bridge in the form of an analogy to a polygonal spring.
 He is confident that a spring with hexagonal colls would not be essentially different from one with circular colls, and this leads him to a really new insight: M (3) S2: Aha!.
.
.
 What if I start with a rod and bend It once (makes bending motion with hands) and.
.
.
bend it again.
.
 Clearly there can't be a hell of a lot of difference between the circle and say, a hexagon.
.
 .
(Draws fig.
 5) Now that's interesting.
 Just looking at this it occurs to me that when force is applied here, you not only get a bend on this segment, but because there's a pivot here, you get a torsion effect.
.
.
Aha! Maybe the behavior of the spring has something to do with twist forces.
.
.
 Let me accentuate the torsion force by making a square (draws fig.
 6) where there's a right angle.
 Now.
 .
.
I have two forces Introducing a stretch.
 I have the force that bends this.
.
.
segment [a] and In addition I have a torsion force which twists at vertex, um, x.
.
.
Now I feel I have a good model of a spring.
.
.
 Now making the sides longer certainly would make the [square] spring stretch more.
 I: How can you tell? S2: Physical intuition.
.
 .
and also recollection.
.
 the longer the segment (moves hands apart) the more the bendabllity (moves hands as if bending a rod).
.
.
 Now the same thing would happen to the torsion I think, because if I have a longer rod (moves hands apart), and I put a twist on it (moves hands as if twisting a rod), it seems to me—again physical intuition—that it will twist more.
.
.
 again, now I'm confirming that by using this method of limits.
 As I bring my hand up (moves right hand' slowly toward left hand) closer and closer to the original place where I hold It, I realize very clearly that It will get harder and harder to twist.
.
.
 And my confidence is now 99J [that the wide spring stretches more].
.
.
I feel a lot better about it.
 [lH] • ^ Sfrlin / ^Di Squir* ^ KIlM Intu \ Twitting KM \ 1 L.
M nOwtlc Cju ItiM ^ ^ i«fM1na\  \ Ditna •IraittaiFig.
 7 Here he is able to firmly connect the original spring to the bending rod case via the bridging analogy of a polygonal spring.
 In addition, considering the polygonal spring triggers the recognition of a torsion effect.
 Thus, in the subject's final understanding of the spring, the spring is linked via the intermediate square spring case to two simpler cases, the twisted rod and the bent rod, as shown In fig.
7.
 The torsion factor is an important insight, because not only is it true that wider springs stretch farther, but in fact the force provided by a helical spring is primarily due to torsion rather than to bending.
 In sunmary, tw; major processes involved in confirming analogy relations have been identified: matching key features or relationships; and forming z_ bridging analogy.
 Fig.
 5 Fig.
 6 138 AHALOCT GENERATION MECHANISMS Analysis of transcripts has led us to propose the hypothesis that there are not one, but at least three types of analogy generation mechanisms: generation via an abstract principle, generative transfonnatlons, and associative leaps.
 Generation from a principle.
 A plausible mechanlSBi for generating analogies can be derived from the common situation In science where a single equation or abstract principle applies to two or more different contexts, such as a pendulim and an oscillating electrical circuit.
 This suggests that analogies may be formed by first recognizing that the original problem situation.
 A, is an exanple of an abstract equation or principle, P.
 The analogous situation, B, Is then recalled or generated as a second exanple of principle P.
 However, although evidence for this pattern has been observed on occasion in interviews, little evidence of It was observed in the analogies generated for the spring problem.
 Instead, two other types of analogy formation processes appear to predominate, which I have called generative transfonmatlons and associative leaps.
 Generative transformations.
 These occur when a subject modifies an aspect of problem A to create a new situation B.
 Examples of evidence for generative transformations from the present protocol are: (1) The subject refers to bending a rod into a polygon (protocol segment 3).
 (2) The subject referring to the spring as a "rod wound up" in the first line of the transcript indicates that the rod idea may have been generated by thinking about unwinding the spring.
 At another point he refers to the rod as an "unwound spring.
" Associative leaps.
 In contrast to modifying the problem In a generative transformation, evidence for an associative leap occurs when the subject refers to an analogous situation B which Is very different qualitatively In a number of ways from the original situation.
 The subject may also refer to "being reminded of" B.
 S2 generated evidence for several associative leaps in the middle of the protocol when he said: "I feel as though I'm reasoning In circles and I think I'll make a deliberate effort to break out of the circle somehow.
.
.
, like rubber bands, molecules, polyesters.
.
.
", apparently attempting to link the spring problem to other situations he knows something about.
 Although he was unable to use any of the associative leaps above effectively In this case, subjects have been observed to use this type of analogy generation technique successfully in other protocols.
 For example, one subject used an analogy to a Utube to solve a problem about hydraulic forces in an apparatus whose shape and topology were quite different.
 It is hypothesized that an associative leap takes place when an established conceptual framework for situation B In memory is activated by an association to some aspect of the original situation A, and that a generative transformation occurs when the subject focuses on an internal representation of the existing problem situation A and changes an aspect of it to create situation B.
 This leads to the prediction that an analogy generated via a transformation should more often be a novel invention (such as the hexagonal spring) an3 sRould more often contribute as a simpler case rather than as a more familiar case.
 Generative transformations and associative leaps have been the primary analogy generation metTiods observed K^ u£ 30 far [15].
 METHODS FOR UNDERSTANDING A SITUATION AND FOR TRANSFERRING KNOWLEDGE FROM B BACK TO A With regard to process 3 above, the requirement that conception B must be predictive or well understood, we note briefly that this can be achieved via factual knowledge, physical intuition, analysis in terras of a theory, or (recursively) via another analogous case C.
 Some methods for applying knowledge from B to A (process t above) are: (1) transferring a prediction directly from B to corresponding variable relationships in A; (2) transferring a partial understanding of certain variable relationships, which with further analysis can lead to a prediction in A; and (3) transferring a method of attack from B to A.
 [20] EJCTREME CASES AND PHYSICAL INTUITION Minimizing or maximizing a feature of the problem sometimes makes the problem easier to analyze, and we call this using an extreme case.
 Extreme cases seem to be generated primarily via generative transformations or problem operators.
 Interestingly, the apparent function of many of the extreme cases observed so far has been to enhance the subject's use of physical intuition in the form of Imaglstlc simulations.
 S2 indicates that his final understanding Is based at the lowest level on such physical intuitions.
 This suggests that certain relationships between forces and other physical variables such as "bending ' can be represented at a deep level in terras of imaglstlc Intuitions rather than abstract principles or equations.
 (See ref.
 [3]).
 CONCLUSION Further research is needed in order to evaluate and add to the results of this exploratory study.
 A number of basic concepts for analyzing patterns of analogical reasoning have been proposed, including: the generation of analogies via transformations and associative leaps; the evaluation of analogy relations via the formation of bridges and the matching of key relationships; and the understanding of situations via the use of extreme cases which can enhance physical intuitions.
 Recursive combinations of these processes can account for many of the patterns observed in other complex solutions involving a number of linked analogies.
 Many solutions by analogy are not "Instant solutions", but a more extended process of conjecture and testing.
 This gives us reason to believe that some of these processes are learnable, rather than being exclusively a product of "genius", and that developing students' abilities to use generative transformations, leaps, and bridges may be possible and desirable.
 Vflien a transformation leads to a conflrmable analogy, we call It a conserving transformation since it conserves the salient relationships In the problem.
 In a broader sense, conserving transformations appear to play a fundamental role at different levels in physics, mathematics, technological invention, and music [16191.
 Conserving transformations appear to be an Important cognitive process worthy of further investigation.
 In the case of S2, the bending rod analogy served as a first order model which gave him an initial handhold on the problem.
 Persistent criticisms and transformations of this model during his vigorous U5 minute solution eventually led hlra to evolve a much better model in the form of a square spring with torsion effects.
 Thus, sophisticated uses of analogy in relatively difficult problems can involve a repeated conjecture, criticism, and modification process that can produce chains of successively more powerful analogies.
 Analogous cases can either play a temporary heur Istic role in helping to generate conjectures during the solution, or they can play the more permanent role of a model in the final solution, or both.
 Certain parallels between these processes and processes of science described 139 in [68,16], among others, suggest that further research along these lines may be of Interest to those studying the processes of hypothesis formation and model construction In science.
 NOTES [1] Brown, J.
S.
, Collins, A.
, and Harris, G.
, "Artificial Intelligence and Learning Strategies", in H.
F.
 O'Neil (ed.
).
 Learning Strategies.
 New York: Academic Press, 1978.
 [2] Clement, J.
, "The Role of Analogy in Scientific Thinking: Examples from a Problem Solving Interview", technical report.
 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Massachusetts at Amherst, 1977.
 [3] Clement, J.
, "Spontaneous Analogies in Scientific Problem Solving", working paper.
 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Massachusetts at Amherst, 1981.
 [<)] Drelstadt, R.
, "An Analysis of the Use of Analogies and Metaphors In Science".
 The Journal of Psychology, Vol 68, 1968.
 [5] Centner, D.
, "The Structure of Analogical Models in Science", technical report.
 Bolt, Beranek and Newman, Inc.
, Cambridge, MA, 1980.
 [6] Hesse, M.
, Models and Analogies In Science.
 University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame, 1966.
 [7] Kuhn, T.
S.
, "Second Thoughts on Paradigms", In The Essential Tension.
 University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1977.
 [8] Lakatos, I.
, Proofs and Refutations: The Logic of Mathematical Discovery.
 Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1976.
 [9] RisslandMlchener, E.
, "Understanding Understanding Mathematics".
 Cognitive Science, Vol 2.
 1978.
 [10] Polya, G.
, Mathematics and Plausible Reasoning.
 (2 Vols) Princeton University Press, Princeton, Mew Jersey, 195t.
 [11] Rumelhart, D.
 and Norman, D.
 , "Analogical Processes In Learning", report no.
 8005, Center for Human Information Processing, University of California at San Diego, 1980.
 [12] VanLehn, K.
 and Brown, J.
S.
 , "Planning Nets: a representation for formalizing analogies and semantic models of procedural skills", to appear in R.
E.
 Snow, P.
A.
 Frederloo, and W.
E.
 Montague (Eds) , Aptitude Learning and Instruction: Cognitive Process Analyses.
 Lawrence 1979.
 ErlbaLBi Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, [13] His meaning can be clarified here by noting that a bug would experience a slope of constant steepness In walking down a freely supported, stretched spring and a slope of increasing steepness on a bending rod.
 He later says that by "spiral" here he meant "helix".
 [It] Two of the subjects in the sample, including S2, had heard that the author was Interested In studying analogies prior to their interview.
 However, the subjects did not know which problems in the interview were amenable to solutions by analogy.
 After the interview, S2 was asked If he thought this prior knowledge had affected this solution and he felt strongly that he had simply solved the problem In the way he normally would.
 Most importantly, none of the subjects had communicated with the author concerning any of the theories or concepts developed In this paper, such as transformations, leaps, bridges, etc.
 [15] Bridging analogies are generated under the multiple constraints of being similar to two situations.
 This leads us to predict that bridging analogies should ordinarily be generated via a transformation rather than a leap, and this is so far consistent with our data.
 In future reports we will show how nongenerative transformations can also be Involved in confirming an analogy relation.
 [16] Cohen, I.
E.
, The Newtonian Revolution: With Illustrations of the Transformation of Scientific Ideas.
 Cambridge U.
 Press, 1980.
 [17] Krueger, T.
, Imagery Pattern i£ Creative Problem Solving.
 Enclna Press, Las Cruces, New Mexico, 1981.
 [18] Shepard, R.
, "Psychophysical Complementarity", in M.
 Kubovy and J.
R.
 Pomerantz (Eds) Perceptual Organization, Lawrence Erlbaim Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, 1979.
 [19] Rlssland, E.
L.
, "Example Generation".
 COINS Technical Report 8011, University of Massachusetts at Amherst, 1980.
 [20] The four criteria for a useful analogy on the first page apply to the strongest use of an analogy where a prediction Is transferred.
 Transfer of a partial understanding or possible method of attack can occur without criteria 2 and 3 being fully satisfied.
 140 Understanding Design Gerhard Fischer and HelnzDieter Boecl<er Research Group on ManMachine Communication Computer Science Department, University of Stuttgart Abstract Design is concerned with how things ("artifacts") ought to be in order to attain goals and function.
 To gain a deeper understanding of the nature of design, we have studied design processes in several different domains; software engineering, creative writing, building models with technical kits and constructing learning environments.
 1.
 Ttie nature of the design process Designers try to shape the components of new structures.
 In general the designer is facing an illstructured problem in a semantically rich domain.
 An emerging design is incorporated in a set of internal and external memory structures (eg on paper, in computer memory).
 The problem solving process for this task can best be characterized as a dialectical information gathering process switching back and forth between creating and understanding subprocesses.
 At each stage in the design process, the partial design (reflected in the descriptive structures) serves as a major stepping stone and as a stimulus for suggesting what should be done next (see A L E X A N D E R 1964 and SIMON 1969).
 There is no doubt that there is domain specific design knowledge: an architect knows a lot about building materials and how to combine them, a software engineer knows many basic algorithms and how to use them in constructing software components.
 The more interesting question in research about design is whether there is also some general design knowledge, which is applicable in many different domains.
 2.
 Universal concepts for design processes Crucial processes in creating a design are: 1) to develop a language for specifying goals and a set of intermediate concepts (eg in the case of technical construction systems: a steering unit, a differential) 2) to deal with sets of possible worlds (ie we have to consider design alternatives) 3) to incorporate the emerging design in a set of external memory structures 'i) to record the relevant parts of the design path (and not only the design product) 5) to create lowcost modifiable models which help us to replace anticipation by analysis and experimentation Understanding (analysis) of existing designs is relevant for the following reasons (especially if we regard the design primarily as an error correcting process): 1) it is a prereguisite for modification (which is necessary because it is not possible for the designer nor for the potential user to foresee all of the opportunities for which a complex system is used).
 2) the insufficiencies of existing prototype models have to be uncovered; the surface manifestations of problems have to be traced back to their causes.
 3) contemplating and experimenting with what has been done so far can stimulate new ideas, new generalisations, new simplifications and new uses for developed parts.
 N e w possibilities may become visible through perception of unplanned relationships.
 Computer science has developed a set of well known (eg topdown, bottomup, stepwise refinement) and less known (eg use of stepping stones, progressive constraints, structured growth, linguistic uniformity, uniformity of interaction, metadescription, contextsensitive descriptions, filters) concepts of design.
 3.
 Technical construction systems and systems for manmachine communication To gain a better understanding for an epistemology of design, we have studied design processes in several domains: software engineering (BOECKER, FISCHER and G U N Z E N H A E U S E R 1980), creative writing (FISCHER 1980), technical construction systems (FISCHER and B O E C K E R 1981) and learning environments (FISCHER, B R O W N and B U R T O N 1978).
 We have verified and extended the basic set of thought processes underlying design and the organization of those processes which serve as guidelines for the implementation of design support systems.
 In our own work we have chosen a specific technical construction system, namely FISCHERJECHNIK (FT).
 FT can be enjoyed by "children of all ages".
 It allows the designer to construct starting with a universal building block  very simple models (eg a car, a crane etc) as well as completely functional models (eg a technically exact model of an assembly line for car manufacturers).
 FT is not only an excellent toy (it gained the "Oscar de Jouet" in 1972 for being elected the best toy of the year) but a realistic design tool which allows to build artifacts of comparable complexity relative to big software systems.
 141 FT is a good example of a design tool that has the property "no treshold, no ceiling": easy things are easy to do and difficult things are possible to do.
 The most important feature of FT is probably the mechanism to join individual building blocks (which is uniform and universal and can be undone in all cases).
 It provides the basis for an environment which allow us to study sophisticated design processes with great similarity to software engineering.
 The other major research area in our work for an epistemology of design has been the design of manmachine communication systems.
 W e will make use of the substantial computational resources at the hardware level (which will become available in the near future) to create a symbiotic environment for man and machine which combines the advantages of both to cooperatively solve design tasks which neither of them could solve alone.
 The main difficulty in this domain is our lack of a theory which is predictive enough to provide a complete set of design criteria.
 W e try to make use of the knowledge about the human information processing system (eg limited STM, good visual chunking methods) to come up with some principles (eg consistency and adequate default assumptions) for the design of these systems.
 The few derivations we can make from these principles, however, immediately lead to serious design conflicts.
 To point out a specific example: if we want to delete a file (out of a large set of successive versions), the default option should be to delete the oldest version whereas if we print or edit a file the default should be the newest version.
 At the surface level this is obviously an inconsistency.
 Only if the user has an explicit conceptual model of these processes (eg about the semantics of "delete", "print" and "edit") this seems to be the obvious way.
 One of the long range goals of our research is to construct computerbased convivial tools (ILLICH 1973).
 These are tools that give the user as much control as possible so that he can do what ever he wants to do.
 W e consider Fischertechnik a good example of a convivial tool (eg compared with a plastic car which can never be modified).
 Our empirical research verified some of our intuitions, namely 1) there exist common features for design processes in different domains 2) design is an incremental activity; a partially completed product is important and useful to gain a deeper understanding of the problem; 3) the major difficulty in design tasks is not to understand the intrinsic semantics of individual building blocks but to predict how an assemblage of such components will behave 4) it is important for the understanding of an artifact that we have access not only to the final product but to the important parts of the evolutionary path which led to it 5) the language developed in Computer Science and specifically In Al is adequate for the description of design processes in different domains.
 H.
 A computer system to support design processes Many design problems (including social planning, VLSI design, software engineering) have demonstrated to us that there are inherent limitations to the complexity that the unaided designer can control in any situation.
 Our system I N F O R M can best be described as an integrated, knowledgebased design environment (primarily used for software creation, maintenance and modification) using multiple windows to provide uniform, direct interactive facilities to the user.
 We expect that systems of this sort (see also GOLDSTEIN and B O B R O W , 1980) will make major contributions to cope with the problems of constructing large software products by keeping the whole programming process in the machine (and not only the result) and by allowing to extend our specification techniques with prototyping.
 3.
 Conclusions Our goals doing this research were: to gain a better understanding of design (a cognitive science task) and to use this understanding to build systems which suport the design process (a cognitive engineering task).
 We believe that domain independent design knowledge and skills exist and that design concepts are the right vocabulary to describe complicated processes in problem solving, expert systems research and software engineering.
 References Alexander, C.
 (1964): "The synthesis of form", Harvard University Press Boecker, H.
D.
, G.
 Fischer and R.
 Gunzenhaeuser (1980): "Die Funktion von integrierten Informationsmanipulationssystemen in der MenschMaschine Kommunikation: Projekt INFORM", M M K M e m o , Institut fuer Informatik, Universitaet Stuttgart Fischer, G.
 (1980): "Integrated Information Manipulation Systems  A cognitive view".
 Proceedings of Coling 1980, the 8th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Tokyo Fischer, G.
 and H.
D.
 Boecker: "The nature of design processes and how computer systems can support them", submitted to IJCAI 81 Fischer, G.
, J.
S.
 Brown and R.
 Burton (1978): "Aspects of a theory of simplification, debugging and coaching", in Proceedings of the 2nd National Conference of the Canadian Society for Computational Studies of Intelligence, Toronto, pp 139145 Goldstein, I.
 and D.
 G.
 Bobrow (1980): "Descriptions for a programming environment".
 Proceedings of AAAI, pplB7189, Stanford Illich, I.
 (1973): "Tools for Conviviality", Perennial Library, Harper and Row, New York Simon, H.
 (1969): "The sciences of the artificial", especially chapter 3: "The Science of Design", MIT Press, Cambridge, M A 142 System Properties of American Law: Constraints on Applying Cognitive Science Janet L.
 Lachman and Roy Lachman University of Houston One measure of the value of a science Is its Impact on other sectors of society.
 Cognitive theory has undergone unprecedented growth in the past decade and there are many areas of potential application.
 One of these is the Institution of law.
 However, law Is an intricately structured system, and efforts to apply cognitive science research findings in legal settings will come face to face with a fundamental reality: the systems properties of the law, and not the extent of our expertise, will determine the nature and extent of such contributions.
 Law is an intellectual enterprise, and much cognitive data appears strikingly pertinent to its operation.
 However, substantial differences between scientific and legal outlook can result in different judgments of pertinence.
 Many of our colleagues, even those who have frequently testified as experts, have been puzzled and even outraged by the exclusion of some of their most salient inputs.
 One who understands the system is likelier to produce information that will be welcomed, or at least appreciate the factors leading to rejection when it occurs.
 This paper will consider certain of the objectives of a trial that determine what expert testimony is likely to be admitted, and to suggest four points at which cognitive expertise might find entree to Institutions of law.
 There is much more to law than the trial of cases, but the trial is a central feature of our legal system.
 It is our ultimate tool for resolving disputes and for Imposing criminal sanction.
 It is also the most common setting for the introduction of nonlegal expertise.
 The nature and extent of expertise that is admitted is determined by the purposes of the trial and the values the system has placed on certain competing purposes.
 A trial is essentially a determination whether the facts of a particular case fit a given pattern, where the pattern has legal consequences.
 For example, if a physician commits malpractice and thereby Injures his patient, the legal consequence Is that he owes the patient money.
 "Malpractice" Is essentially a legal pattern consisting of failure to provide the level of care the doctor implicitly promised when he undertook to treat the patient.
 When a patient sues his doctor for malpractice, the trial will be an effort to find out what level of care the doctor implicitly promised, and whether the treatment fell below that level; whether the patient was really injured, and if so, whether the doctor's conduct caused the Iniury.
 These facts are established on the basis of the evidence admitted at the trial, which Includes the testimony of witnesses, expert and otherwise.
 In a Jury trial, the jury determines the facts, within certain limits, and applies the law as Instructed by the judge.
 In a bench trial, the judge finds the facts and applies the law.
 In either rase, the factual determinations are made in a context of competing values, of which achievement of truth Is only one.
 The legal standard of truth is not, and never has been, absolute.
 For centuries, courts have decided the truth of claims where absolute accuracy Is unobtainable.
 What j ^ obtainable in our adversary system is procedural fairness; and as our system has evolved, procedural fairness has become the measure of the truth achieved.
 One dimension of the fairness of the system is the speed with which a result is reached: "justice delayed is justice denied.
" Moreover, the perception of fairness Is a significant dimension of Che system; If people do not trust institutional methods of dispute resolution, they will turn to noninstitutional remedies.
 And of course, a major purpose of a justice system is to avoid resort to such remedies.
 The presiding Judge at a trial is attempting to structure a procedure that achieves the best compromise of these sometimes competing values.
 He must not prejudice the Interests of a party; he must not deprive a party of a fair trial.
 But the system does not require him to give any party the best trial possible.
 There are many different Judicial decisions that are consistent with fairness; and typically the judge will not be reversed as long as his decisions have not denied a party a fair hearing.
 Among the decisions the judge makes is whether any witness, expert or otherwise, shall be heard.
 He must admit testimony only If it would be unfair to exclude it.
 He will admit testimony if he thinks it will help the Jury decide the issue it must decide, sufficient to offset the costs in court time.
 The trial, then, is a method for determining disputed facts by means of structured procedures.
 The distinction between "facts" and "law" is a fundamental one.
 "Facts" in the malpractice lawsuit previously mentioned are the nature of the doctor's implied promise, and whethet his conduct caused the patient's injury, etc.
 The "law" encompasses virtually all else, including the trial procedures themselves.
 Witnesses are supposed to testify to facts only; expert witnesses are permitted to express opinions on factual matters.
 However, no witness is supposed to testify to matters of law.
 Consequently, testimony that is relevant to an ultimate fact in issue tends to be freely admitted; but testimony that has implications for the fairness of the procedures is less welcome.
 Certain types of psychological expertise, particularly, tend to relate rather Intimately to the conduct of the trial itself, and in these areas courts may be surprisingly resistant to hearing what the expert has to say.
 We shall return to this point.
 How, then, does cognitive expertise exert an Impact on the legal system? The mechanics of impact are multifarious; but there appear to be four "points of system operation" at which cognitive research might be received.
 The first of these might be called "procedural reform".
 Procedural reform involves changes in procedural rules themselves.
 This is the level at which research on the effects of jury size impacts the system, for example.
 Procedural reforms are basically a legislative prerogative, and research concerning procedural reforms is most likely to Impact the system in legislative committee hearings, direct lobbying, and the like.
 If cognitive research on Judicial decisionmaking has procedural Implications, this would be the appropriate level for Its introduction.
 The second point at which cognitive science is likely to Impact the law is at the traditional level of assisting In fact finding.
 This form of impact is achieved by the familiar means of testifying at trial, regarding some area of expertise that has become an issue in a particular lawsuit.
 One example is testimony about the effect of fatigue on reaction time in an automobile accident case.
 The third point is subtle, falling somewhere between the first and second.
 We shall label It "judicial control processes", but the label is not selfexplanatory.
 At this level, the cognitive scientist appears to be testifying to facts, in the conventional manner, but the testimony has Implications for trial procedures.
 As previously mentioned, testimony of this type may be resisted.
 143 Cognitive research specifically designed to have legal significance may impact the legal system at this level, but it requires a sympathetic Judge for It to be heard.
 One example is eyewitness identification research.
 The cognitive scientist Is called, usually by the defense in a criminal case, to tell the Jury the results of research on eyewitness identification.
 The researcher's testimony is received as "fact" testimony, nominally to help the Jury evaluate the credibility of the eyewitness.
 However, it has wider implications, because It suggests that Juries need assistance in evaluating the general credibility of eyewitnesses — not just the eyewitness in a particular case.
 Juries are presumed to possess without advice proper perspicacity on such matters.
 The Judicial impulse may be to exclude the testimony, perhaps on the basis that it will not help the jury.
 And in one sense, it won't: If the prosecution's case depends heavily on the eyewitness, how can It help the jurv to be told that their best source of information is unreliable? No comparable problem exists where the testimony is more traditional; it need not unsettle the Judge If a witness swears that his research shows that tired people react slowly.
 Despite pressures to exclude expert testimony on the reliability of eyewitnesses, there is a trend toward admitting it.
 This trend may reflect a factor that countervails judicial resistance: only the defendant can appeal in a criminal case, and it is usually defendants who seek to introduce expert testimony to counter the effects of an eyewitness.
 By giving the defendant the benefit of every doubt, the Judge minimizes the occasions on which his decision is reversed on appeal.
 A second example of cognitive science research impacting the legal system at this third level is work on hypnosis.
 Many witnesses have proved able to recall additional and important detail under hypnosis that they could not recall otherwise.
 There are important legal Issues involved in the use of hypnosis: Can the witness meaningfully swear the oath to tell the truth while hypnotized? Can the witness swear before being hypnotized, and comply with the oath afterward? Can the witness be meaningfully crossexamined? Cognitive research on hypnotism may prove considerably more valuable to our legal system than that on eyewitness identification, for it potentially adds to the factfinding arsenal.
 It has also met with initial resistance; like eyewitness identification reliability, it has implications for the conduct of the trial itself.
 However, if the nature of hypnosis can be understood, the legal Issues can be addressed rationally and the system eventually will encompass it.
 The final area of potential impact might be called "indirect inputs".
 Empirical data available in cognitive science that are rejected at the other levels can nevertheless be used informally by attorneys.
 A wellknown example of impact at this level comes from social psychology, where empiricallybased theories of smallgroup interaction have been used to assist lawyers in the juryselection process.
 Comparably, a cognitive scientist whose formal testimony on eyewitness identification has been rejected by the trial judge may nevertheless suggest to the attorney the most vulnerable aspects of the eyewitness' account, and these suggestions may be used to advantage in crossexamination.
 By far the smoothest entry to the legal system is in the conventional role of expert on a disputed issue of pure fact.
 Much of our research has implications for important areas of the law, which would be quickly noticed by the legal profession if it were properly packaged.
 For example, psycholinguistic research on language comprehension is typically done using narrative prose.
 However, reading the instructions on equipment, medicine bottles and the like also involves language comprehension — and also figures in an important class of products liability cases.
 There may be some questions that could be meaningfully addressed in either context; if so, why not use the one with practical utility? Incidental learning and recognition memory, two familiar areas of memory research, are significant factors in trademark infringement cases.
 Some of these research questions might be addressed by using real or simulated trademarks as stimuli; and the researcher would become a potential contributor to the patent and copyright bar.
 Research on cognitive development could suggest when a child is old enough to make informed decisions on matters affecting his own welfare, such as medical treatment (including abortion), which parent shall have custody, etc.
 Psychological and psycholingulstic inquiry into the concept of intentionallty potentially has profound implications.
 Many additional areas of research could be suggested that would be both quality cognitive science and oriented toward significant Issues of law.
 We have suggested four distinct ways that cognitive scientists can seek to make contributions to our legal Institutions.
 The reception will be different depending upon the point of impact; the cognitive scientist who understands the properties of the legal system will be in a better position to comprehend its response to his proffered contribution.
 144 Writing with a C o m p u t e r Ira Goldstein Xerox Palo Alto Research Center PaloAllo.
Cal.
 9 4 3 0 4 Abstract: This essay conjectures that an author's planning process will be lacililaled by a tool that represents his plan at various levels of abstraction as a netvi/ork of subgoals, with the subgoals not necessarily restricted to a linear order.
 Machine reasoning on such structures has been explored in artificial intelligence research; our proposal is to make these structures available to the writer as a calculus for representing his essays and to use the computer as an interactive editing tool to manipulate them.
 Writing and Planning Machine planning If we examine the literature on machine planning [1], it is apparent that data structures lor plans must have a capacity to represent plans at various levels of abstraction.
 Otherwise the planning program is prematurely mired in unnecesary detail.
 Furthermore, at any particular level, the representation should minimize constraints on the order in which goals must be accomplished: it should be possible to express that two goals must be satislied at a certain point in the plan, but in an unspecified order.
 Again, this is to avoid having the planning process become prematurely committed to a particular solution.
 It should also be possible to express at a more concrete level that the goals in question must be accomplished in a fixed order to satisfy constraints that arise at that level.
 Problems ol writing: These characteristics of the planning process apply to organizing an essay just as much as they apply to a robot choosing a path to some destination.
 An author lias a variety of topics to presenthis goals and ought not to be prematurely lied down to a particular order early in his planning process Furthermore, he should be able to consider the organization ol these topics independently ol their details.
 Limilations ol paper: Authors can meet the demands of planning with pencil and paper.
 They may work with outlines to deal with their matenal abstractly and 3x5 cards to avoid premature commitment to a particular ordering.
 However, as a medium lor planning, paper has a number of difficulties.
 Exploring alternatives is cumbersome It is difficult to maintain two versions ol an outline or a file of cards.
 Backing up to a previous version is equally dillicult, especially if some changes have been made that apply to both the new and old versions.
 Avoiding premature commitment to a particular organization is hindered by the linear nature of prose.
 Constraints regarding length, ligures or citations must be remembered by the author with no help Irom the medium itself.
 Virtues ol the computer The computer is a more flexible medium than paper for planning because it supports data structures that capture the nature of plans better than linear strings of text or files of index cards.
 The computer can represent alternative versions with shared structure, maintain a history ol previous versions, represent nonlinear org.
inizations ol goals by means ol nptworks, and express constraints as programs that monitor the evolving plan These data structures can.
 ol course, be sketched on paper, but they rapidly become too complex to edit easily.
 The computer can serve as an editing device that simplilies these data structures by means of filtered views and presents them graphically to an author so as to make them comprehensible and easy to edit.
 An Example To exemplify this, I will use my own experience in writing the introduction to this essay.
 While it is short, its generation nevertlieless required the solution ol a variety of typical writing problems.
 I shall show how the computer was employed as a tool for coping with these problems.
 This example is offered with an awareness that the value of the computer as a planning aid increases in proportion to the complexity of the writing task.
 In this respect, planning a journal article or a book would be a more compelling example than planning an introduction to a short essay.
 However, such an example would also be more complex and time consuming to present.
 Hence, I have chosen a simple, but real case to present.
 The reader is asked to generalize this example to writing problems that he has encountered, especially in the context of longer and more complex documents.
 As with any introduction to a research article, my subgoals were to present a brief statement of the problem that that I was attempting to solve, the nature of previous solutions, their limitations, the particular solution that I was proposing, and the evidence lor this solution.
 The problem that I laced was how much to say about each of these topics and in what order.
 Had I pursued this task with pencil and paper, I would typically have written several dralts ol the introduction.
 The drafts would have included changes to both organization and the content of individual paragraphs.
 I might also have created and revised an outline of topics to be discussed, sometimes to serve as an initial plan, sometimes to analyze an existing draft.
 Instead, I wrote this introduction using a writing environment implemented in PIE, a prototype personal information environment for the representation of designs [2J.
 Figure 1 is a graphic representation ol the top level network that I constructed to represent an early plan lor this introduction.
 The node labelled Introduction represents the main goal.
 It is preceded by the Abstract node and followed by the node that represents the goal lor this section.
 The box in boldface linked to the Introduction node is the plan lor accomplishing this goal.
 It consists ol lour subgoals that must precede the statement of my particular solution, but are as yet unordered.
 The first return that I obtained Irom using PIE is rellected in its ability to express and manipulate a nonlinear sequence of topics Plan 1 did not commit m e to a particular order for discussing G4 through G7.
 Figures 2 and 3 show two alternative refinements of Plan 1.
 These relinements differ in the order in which they propose to discuss the subgoals.
 They are similar in that G6 has been eliminated in both The basis for this decision is that it is not a topic of sufficient interest to the intended audience the members of the cognitive science society.
 The details of fi6 still remain in the computer database and available lor olher discussions ol this research.
 145 G 1 : Abstract [»JG2: Introduction [*\ G 3 : Example [• G 4 : Problems of Writing — i G 5 : Limitations of Paper — G 6 : Present Text Editors • G 7 : Machine Planning —' G 8 : Virtues of Computer Fig.
 1.
 Plan 1, an early plan in whicfi the ordering of subgoals has not, as yet, been entirely determined.
 G 1 : AbstracTj^l G 2 : Introduction f>| G 3 : Example |E G 4 : Problems ot Writing d »|G5: Limitations of Paper G 7 : Machine P l a n n i n g ] — G 8 : Virtues of Computer Fig.
 2.
 Plan 2, a refinement to plan 1 in which G 6 has been suppressed and the remaining goals ordered.
 G 1 : Abstract~l»| G 2 : lntroductiorr}>| G 3 : Example [r G 4 : Problems of Writing —i G 5 : Limitations of Paper |G 8 : Virtues of Computer •• G 7 : Machine Planning J Fig.
 3.
 Plan 3, an alternative to plan 2 in which a different order for the subgoals is chosen.
 The ability to manipulate alternatives is ttie second return ttiat I obtained from using PIE.
 With paper and pencil, multiple drafts present the difficulty that one cannot edit some paragraph common to two drafts and have the changes show up in both.
 Nor can one easily place tv/o drafts side by side, with their dillerences highlighted Both capabilities are present in a computer based planning system.
 The link from G't in both plans can point to the same subnetwork; hence, changes to that network will be rellected in both plans.
 Analysis programs can examine two network structures and highlight their dillerences.
 Ultimately, I chose Plan 3 based on a belief that the Initial discussion ol writing difficuities cafled lor in Plan 2 was unnecessary because they were well known.
 The relevant difficulties ol writing are mentioned three paragraphs later in the context of describing the application of machine planning to the writing task The appeal of Plan 3 is that the discussion occupies less space, a significant virtue given a iimit of 2000 words.
 This leads to a discussion of a third virtue of PIE for document planning: the ability to assert constraints on the plan and have the computer monitor these constraints.
 PIE allows the designerin this case, author •to assert predicates regarding properties Of the network that he wishes to be monitored.
 One such predicate assigned to the node representing the document as a whole is that Its entire length not exceed 2000 words.
 Another kind of predicate assigned to paragraphs that reference bibliographic material is thai these citations appear in the bibliography.
 Similar consistencyrelated predicates apply to section and figure references.
 These predicates serve as reminders to the author and as a mechanism to preserve consistency among the various parts of the document being edited.
 A fourth virtue of the system that is closely related to constraints is the ability to view the network through a filler.
 Here a constraint is imposed for the purpose of limiting the portion ol the network that appears in a given view.
 Figures 2 and 3 exemplify one such lifter: nodes that are not finked to a pfan are suppressed.
 The resuft is that the node labelled Present Text Editors, which appears in Figure 1, is not present In these views.
 In general, a lifter is a predicate on the network and results in some set of nodes and/or links being suppressed.
 Objeclions The reader has no doubt thought of objeclions to the claim that this approach will facifitale good writing.
 Here are three common criticisms, and possible replies.
 Structures appropriate lor representing machine plans are not appropriate lor representing human plans.
 Clearly some data structures appropriate for computers are entirety inappropriate as a calculus lor people to employ for similar tasks.
 And any machine data structure is inappropriate if presented to people at too low a level of implementation.
 However, this is not to say that all formalizations of cognitive processes developed for machine problem solvers are useless lor people.
 I believe that the formalization of planning described here is useful because it is fargefy based on the nature of pfanning, rather than on the idiosyncracies of computers.
 As evidence lor this, pfanning networks have been devefoped in the context of PERT charts to anafyze and guide the pfanning of complex projects fike the construction of ships.
 The similarities between these networks and the Al structures is far greater than their differences.
 Conscious planning to the degree proposed here will act as a barrier to creative writing.
 This is a version of the centipede argument namely, that if a centipede thought about or planned his perambulation too carefully, he would fall over into a ditch in utter confusion.
 Better to just engage in the process without conscious examination.
 Teachers of writing courses would lake issue with the centipede argument.
 In such courses, students are taught many strategies for organizing their material, and the claim is made that attention to organizational issues repays the writer many times over at later stages ol the writing process.
 Our position is that il planning is usefuf, surety the computer can provide a better mechanism than 3x5 cards.
 We do not argue that a document should always be approached in a top down mode.
 At certain times, the best strategy is to write a particular section in some detail belore completing the plan lor the entire document Using the computer does not prevent this.
 The author can move from one level ol the data structure to another at his choice Figure 2, for example, might have been the first plan created by an author.
 Later, in searching for an alternative organization, he might step back and express the fess committed pfan of Figure 1, then refine it to the plan of Figure 3.
 The overhead in using the computer is too high: belter pencil and paper because it is easy to use and does not itsell obstruct the writing process.
 146 Unless careful attention is paid to the human factors of designing a planning editor, this objection Is a telling one.
 Powerful planning structures are useless unless they are easy to manipulate and comprehend.
 The graphic display of the planning network used in the figures of this article constitutes an implicit proposal for a presentation mode that is easy to understand.
 The PIE system presently uses a non graphic display of the networit: one that requires more tutelage than the network diagrams, but is easier to implement Research into the mental models that users have of such networks and into userinterface design that they find comfortable to employ is critical to the success of such tools.
 However, even with a good interface, some planning overhead will remain.
 Hence, another reply to this objection is that only some documents justify the overhead.
 O n e page m e m o s do not.
 But our hypothesis is that for more complex documents, the planning overhead required by the computer can be less than the overhead required by pencil and paper.
 A third response is that while authors are presently more familiar with pencil and paper than with computers, this will not be so a decade hence.
 For a large number of reasons, it is reasonable to predict that computers will become a universal technology, and that computer literacy will be as c o m m o n a subject as penmanship.
 Hence, that part of the overhead due to unfamillarity with computers is on the wane.
 Extensions We did not attempt to formalize the kinds of plans that an author might employ, beyond providing a means to represent subgoals and successor relationships.
 However, books on rhetoric and debate contain lists of such plans.
 This suggests that one might be able to define a set of generic planning schemata to represent different arguments such as argumentby induction, argumentby authority, and argument bydeductiveprool.
 A given schema would contain slots for the various positions that a given argument requires: the axioms and logic of a proof; the set of examples lor an inductive argument, etc.
 A writer could then expand a plan for a document as a series of instantiations of different schemata.
 Whether this would result in more coherent or compelling prose remains to be seen, but it would at least be useful as a device to articulate a formal theory of argument structure.
 An application of the computer complementary to its use as a writing tool is its use as a reading instrument.
 The planning structures created by the author can serve as a roadmap and the computer can act as a device lor examining these structures Potentially, this increases the reader's ability to browse through material in idiosyncratic ways, rather than being tied to a fixed order of presentation selected by the author.
 It may also simplily the writer's task by eliminating the need to find a single linearization appropriate lor all audiences.
 H o w comlorlable a reader will be with nonlinear information structures and whether there are writing and reading skills uniquely appropriate to them are research questions that must tie addressed.
 Conclusions This essay has proposed that planning is one writing skill that can be lacilitated by the use of the computer as an design tool.
 Experiments to verily this proposal and research to investigate what other skills of writing might be facilitated by this medium remain lor the future: what is certain now is that if we program these machines to imitate paper, as is the case lor the current generation of text editing systems, we will never know if qualitative improvements in the handling of words can be obtained.
 Bibliography [1] Sacerdoti, E.
 A Structure lor Plans and Behavior Elsevier Computer Science Library, N ew York, 1977.
 (2) Goldstein, I and Bobrow, D "A Layered Approach to bollware Design to appear in Sandewall, E.
, Shrobe H and m r ' l ^ i ° ' '"'̂ '̂"''"̂  Programming Environments.
 McGraw 147 CREATING PLEASANT PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENTS FOR COGNITIVE SCIENCE STUDENTS H.
 Einenstadt, J.
H.
 Laubsch, 8 J.
H.
 Kahney Open University, England 1.
 Introduction and backpround This paper describes our current efforts towards the systematic improvement of a LOGOlike software environment called SOLO (Eisenstadt, 1978), which has been used by over 1500 Cognitive Psychology students at the Open University.
 SOLO is geared towards the manipulation of aasertional data bases, and provides the students with a handful of easy to use primitives with which they can address some elementary problems of knowledge representation.
 Students login to one of our DECsystem20s from a regional study centre, and experience about 10 hours of handson activity early in the academic year.
 Later on, they attend a residential summer school at which they can acquire an additional 50 hours of handson experience.
 Although SOLO is a toy language in some respects, the total user environment has many features whicVi make it ideal for providing the vast majority of our students (80? of whom are computernaive) with their first exposure to computing.
 Among these features are a spelling corrector, syntaxdirected editing aids, automataic display of data base changes as they occur, "undo" facilities, and an easily modifiable userprofile.
 An indepth analysis of our students' errors (Lewis, 1980) has led to an improved design to help ensure that beginners can write syntactically correct programs with a minimum of fuss.
 A microcomputer implementation, which uses screenoriented syntaxdirected editing (of.
 Teitelbaum * Reps, 1980) is being piloted just prior to this conference.
 Even with SOLO's extensive user aids and carefully pretested curriculum materials, our students still experience problems in writing programs which perform precisely as intended.
 Because of this, we have undertaken a detailed analysis of their programming behaviour.
 Our empirical studies, described in section 2, have highlighted the use of a small number of programming schemas by a large proportion of our students.
 These schemas serve as the basis for an automated debugging assistant, which is described in section 3.
 2.
 The behaviour of SOLO programmers As part of their SOLO activities at the beginning of the year, our students are asked to "write a program which makes the following inference: If someone is found to be guilty, then whoever that person works for is also guilty.
" In solving the problem, students are invited to invent their own data structures and algorithms.
 We analyzed a sample of 160 student programs to see if some underlying order could be found among a potentially large variety of databases and program structures.
 As it turns out, the programs written by these students are built from a handful of basic program schemas.
 These schemas are langaugeindependent programming constructs such as FILTER, CONJUNCTION, SIDEEFFECT, and GENERATEHEXTOBJECT, which are closely related to those found in the LI"P "plan library" of Shrobe, Waters * Sussman (1979).
 The students' databases can be broken down into basic relational patterns.
 These patterns are reliably associated with particular program structures, allowing us to predict in 80^ of the cases precisely what the students' program organization will be.
 To illustrate this point, consider the following typical (studentgenerated) database: BURGESS ' —ISA —>COHMUNIST I—WASAT—>CAMBRIDGE I—WORKSFOR—>PHILBY PHILBY ; —ISA—>cohmi;nist —WASAT—>CAHBRIDGE —WORKSFOR—>BLUNT BLUNT I—ISA —>COMMUNIST I —WASAT—>CAHBRIDGE I —WORKSFOR—>THEQUEEN This database exhibits the following patterns: TransitiveRelation: WORKSFOR (BURGESS PHILBY BLUNT THEQUEEN) SharedSuccessor: (ISA COMMUNIST) (BURGESS PHILBY BLUNT) (WASAT CAMBRIDGE) (BURGESS PHILBY BLUNT) Several items (BURGESS, PHILBY, BLUNT) are present in both the TransitiveRelation and the SharedSuccessor lists.
 One of the program structures typically accompanying such a database structure contains three segments: a CONJUNCTION (COMPLEXFILTER), SIDEEFFECT, and GENERATENEXTOBJECT.
 The SharedSuccessors will be used as a FILTER selectively to choose nodes on which a SIDEEFFECT is perpetrated (e.
g.
 asserting X ISA SPY) and the TransitiveRelation list will be used to GENERATENEXTOBJECT.
 Since the SharedSuccessor list contains two patterns, a COMPLKXFILTER will almost surely be used: IF x isn communist AND X wasat Cambridge THEN .
.
.
 But why should a student write a program like this in the first place? Our ?inalysis indicates that students have their own stylised interpretations, or mental models, of the task at hand.
 For instance, some students think that a program involving two inferences is called for: "If X has done something criminal then he is guilty.
 And if this is so, then his employer is subject to the same scrutiny, and so on for all employers.
" Other students feel that only one inference is called for: "Assuming X is guilty, his employer, by association, is guilty also, and so on for all employers.
" The observed program structures ought to correspond to students' mental models of the task.
 Some of these mental models are "appropriate'', in that they address the problem as stated, while others introduce certain anomalies which preclude a satisfactory solution.
 Such "inappropriate" models could actually be artifacts of Rt<idents "thinking in SOLO" and getting led astray.
 In order to test these ideas we have begun studying individual students in depth, collecting videotaped protocols and terminal session transcripts.
 The first subject began her project session with the clear intention of writinp, a program involving two inferpnces.
 Because of preconceived and inaccurate notions about constraints on the way she was allowed to approach the problem and because of misconceptions arising from her interaction with SOLO, she twice altered her intentions.
 At the end of the session the 148 student had a working program for a "oneinference" interpretation of the task described above, a conpromise with which she herself was not completely satisfied.
 All of her programming behavior throughout this session, her various ipproachea to solving the problem, and the bugs she encountered, fell within the scope of thf structures we had identified in the earlier analysis of 160 programs.
 Our ibility to categorize standard database structures and predict implementation strategies on the basis of those structures means that we can develop tools for assisting students in terms of the way in which they prefer to think about the task at hand.
 One such tool is described in the next section.
 7.
 Debugging Aids We have designed and partially implemented a tutorial debugging assistant which attempts to articulate the causes of bugs in terras which are close to the way we believe the students actually think about their own implementations.
 The bugs dealt with range from domain independent violations of the semantics of SOLO to domain specific errors that can be detected only if knowledge about the task at hand is used.
 The debugging assistant uses symbolic evaluation (cf.
 Ruth, 1976) as a tool for (l) recognizing proceduron aa parts of a given "library plan", (2) detecting errors of the following types: unreachable program steps, purposeless steps, reference to absent database objects, infinite recursion because of a missing or unsatisfiable termination condition.
 In the tutorial situation, a student's goal is to write a program to accomplish some modelling task.
 The debugging assistant is provided with a prototypical solution in terms of a canonical effect description.
 The task of the assistant is to recognize a match between the canonical effect description and an effect description derived from the student's own program.
 In penoral these will not match, and the nature of the deviation will enable the assistant to draw the studpnt'a attention to shortcomings of his or her program which may be classified in the following way:  The program will achieve the desired effect only in certain cases.
 A counterexample outside this range can provoke the student to discover the cause.
  The program would work if missing data or inconsistent entries in the data base were corrected.
 These corrections can be pointed out directly.
 A partic\ilar subprocedure, if corrected using heuristics about typical errors (e.
g.
 missing indirect link, violation of a program schema), would make the overall program correct.
 In this case, »n appropriate hint can be provided for the st\ident.
 None of the above.
 In the last case, the student may initiate a dialogue, reqiiesting help on a particular procedure.
 During the dialogue the asr^i^tant tries to find out the intended effect of that procedure (Eisenstadt * Laubsch, 1980).
 It does this by categorizing the procedure into one of several programming schemas stored in a langungeindependent "plan library", using a notation developed by Rich « Shrobe (1978).
 Consider the case in which the nearest matching schema ia "conjunctive filter and side effect".
 The assistant examines the deviation between the user's procedure and the stored schema.
 The following violations of the use of that schema may be recognized: omission of a conjunct, omission of the side effect, wrong (or transposed) arguments in the slots of the schema, or wrong control flow links.
 The assistant can describe these violations in terms which the student can relate to, since the library plans are themselves based upon schemas known to occur in students' code.
 Since the students' procedures depend on their databases, and vice versa, the debugging assistant relies heavily on domainspecific knowledge to deal with alternative ways of formulating a solution to a given problem.
 Although the students have a great deal of freedom to choose ways of implementing solutions, they typically resort to a few common approaches.
 The assistant knows about these, and uses these both to make sense of what the students are attempting and to explain why they have gone astray.
 4.
 Conclusions Our experience with SOLO leads us to believe that a SOLOlike language/environment/curriculum could be of use to a broader group of cognitive science students— for instance as the basis of a beginners' LISP curriculum oriented entirely towards patternmatching and assertional data bases.
 For this to become a reality, it is important to understand precisely what remaining problems students have in this type of environment, and why.
 Our empirical work is a step in this direction.
 It has immediate spinoffs in that it provides a foundation for our debugging assistant.
 The assistant provides students with a tool for attaining their goals, and provides us with a tool for analyzing and describing their behaviour.
 REFERENCES Eisenstadt, M.
 Artificial intelligence project.
 Units 5/4 of Cognitive psychology: â  third level course.
 Milton Keynes: Open University Press, 1978.
 Eisenstadt, H.
 « Laubsch, J.
 Towards an automated debugging assistant for novice programmers.
 Proceedings of the AISB80 conference on Artificial Intelligence, Amsterdam, 1980.
 Lewis, M.
 Improving SOLO's userinterface: an empirical study of user behaviour and proposals for costeffective enhancements to SOLO.
 Technical report no.
 7, Computer Assisted Learning Research Group, The Open University, 1990.
 Rich, C.
 a Shrobe, H.
 Initial report on a Lir.
P programmer's apprentice.
 IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, SE4:6," 1978.
 R\ith, G.
R.
 Intelligent program analysis.
 Artificial intelligence, 7, 1976.
 Shrobe, H.
, Waters, R.
, « Suasman, G.
 A hypothetical monologue illustrating the knowledge underlying program analysis.
 MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory Memo 507, 1979.
 Teitelbaum, T.
, S Reps, T.
 The Cornell program synthesizer: a syntaxdirected progrnmming environment.
 Technical report flO4?1, Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, 1980.
 149 New Tools for Cognitive Science* Leonard Friedman Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology Pasadena.
 CA 91109 Both AI and Cognitive Science must deal with uncertainty much of the time.
 To cope with this problem, new systems are being developed in AI for representing and propagating subjective belief using semantic nets.
 In these systems, propagation of uncertainty goes on while logical inferences are drawn.
 Cognitive scientists may find these methods useful for applications in learning and problemsolving, so this paper will describe the nature of the tools and mention some examples of applications.
 There is a long history of attempts by logicians and mathematicians to represent human reasoning more or less realistically.
 Two basic methods have been employed.
 One approach is the path of inference, the drawing of conclusions from "givens".
 The other is the path of likelihood, the estimation of certainty on the basis of experience of some kind.
 The first theories to be solidly founded have been formal mathematical logic and the theory of probability.
 Unfortunately, formal logic applies only to a narrow class of situations, and most human reasoning is outside its scope.
 Similarly, to be applied, probability often demands knowledge not possessed by people.
 What would be most desirable would be a wedding of inference and likelihood, so that degrees of ignorance could be associated with assertions without requiring unavailable knowledge.
 In order to make the contributions of the new methods clearer, we shall describe the nature of the modelling limitations in the older formalisms.
 Logics such as prepositional calculus and firstorder predicate calculus demand certainty of belief in the truth or falsity of assertions.
 In addition, they are monotonic; i.
e.
, they are unable to alter beliefs once established, and also possess no representation of passage of time.
 One by one these modelling limitatations are being overcome.
 A variety of nonmonotonic logics have been developed which permit the altering of established beliefs.
 They do this by representing the passage of time in successive "context" layers, each of which is a snapshot of the state of belief in the facts of the universe of discourse.
 As new evidence is introduced, concomitant shifts of belief are permitted and propagated.
 Psychologists long ago proved that ordinary human reasoning is often in disagreement with the dictates of strict probability theory.
 That theory demands knowledge of probability distributions, gathered in a usually laborious fashion.
 Situations in which the probability of an event depends conditionally on many other events are computed by using Bayes formula.
 Bayesian statistics requires a knowledge of a large number of probabilities, not often known to the investigator.
 On the other hand, humans may reason successfully in situations where they are uncertain and possess no statistical or probabilistic knowledge.
 The new methods offer the possibility of modelling some aspects of this type of reasoning.
 The techniques assume a general knowledge of facts and interrelationships while not requiring detailed statistics.
 They have been developed by modifying logic on the one hand and Introducing parameters that replace probability on the other.
 We shall not mention the numerous logicians who have contributed to what is called confirmation theory.
 Zadeh, as early as 1965, began the development of "Fuzzy Logic" (Zadeh '65).
 Some years later, Shortliffe and Buchanan developed a method of representing degrees of subjective belief or disbelief numerically (Shortliffe and Buchanan '75, Shortliffe '76).
 Drawing on the work of the confirmation theorists in logic, Shortliffe and Buchanan found a formulation by which they could fulfill certain criteria established by these workers and at the same time draw "reasonable" inferences with which they associated numerical degrees of certainty.
 Their work was limited to a narrow class of expressions in the propositional calculus.
 The implementation was monotonic; i.
e.
, belief in a fact could only grow as new supporting evidence was adduced.
 Contrary evidence also permitted disbelief to grow when that was appropriate.
 Evidence for and against a hypothesis was weighed by taking the difference between belief and disbelief.
 In the MYCIN system, they applied a single mode of inference, confirmation, to medical diagnosis, and called it inexact reasoning.
 Their significant contribution was to provide a means for making logical inferences based on subjective certainties.
 Exact formulas were given for the propagation of subjective belief.
 The formulas depended on an initial assignment of belieftransfer coefficients by a human "expert".
 My own work has been concerned with generalizing the methods and refining the formulas to apply to arbitrary expressions of the propositional calculus, employing four rules of inference (ponens, tollens, confirmation, and denial) rather than the single confirmation rule.
 Also, the implementation is a nonmonotonic logic, thus permitting both belief and disbelief to fluctuate according to the evidence.
 The set of logical rules is called plausible inference and the implementation is named the PI system (Friedman '80a, '81).
 It is a general logical system, reasoning in either direction, unlike r̂YCIN which was limited to backward chaining of expressions in a simple form.
 It also has the ability, on the basis of new evidence, to make its own dynamic assignments of belieftransfer coefficients in certain situations.
 This ability is essential for learning, as the coefficients are u measure of the relevance of one fact to another.
 The PI system has been applied to fault diagnosis of a spacecraft (Friedman '80b).
 While this line of development was taking place, two mathematicians, Dempster and his pupil Shafer, were independently developing a mathematical theory of evidence (Shafer '76).
 This theory tackled the problem of representing the degree of ignorance and calculating the likelihood of evidence whether based on objective or subjective considerations.
 By objective we mean based on formal probability.
 They showed that measures could be devised in a very general way to * This paper incorporates the results of research carried out at the Jet Prtpulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under contract NAS700, sponsored by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
 150 calculate subjective likelihoods.
 Their formulas had as limiting cases the results of probability theory.
 Barrett has shown that for certain conditions that apply to our representation, Dempster's general combining formula for the calculation of likelihood or certainty reduces to that employed by Shortliffe and Buchanan, and by myself in plausible inference (Barnett '81).
 However, Shortliffe and Buchanan's basic formulation was an ad hoc attempt to fit certain logical criteria, so both their rules and those of plausible inference lack a solid mathematical foundation in the computation of belief.
 Shafer's work shows that the present rules of plausible inference are applicable only for a restricted set of cases, but also provides the information that makes it possible to augment the rules so that it is applicable to most cases of interest, and solidly founded.
 For his thesis, a doctoral candidate in AI, John Lowrance, is applying Dempster and Shafer's work to a problem in vision.
 Recently he and several coworkers have drafted a paper that applies the Dempster and Shafer rules to a different problem (Garvey, Lowrance and Fischler '81).
 They are estimating the source of a given set of noisy measurements when the origin of those measurements comes from one of a known set of emitters.
 The measurements are combined to give the degree of support and the uncertainty associated with the evidence for each emitter before that belief is propagated to other assertions via inference.
 Such quantities are exactly what is needed.
 in completely automated diagnostic or decisionmaking inference systems that must deal with uncertainty.
 The measuring devices would feed degree of belief into assertions linked into a knowledge base, and by plausible inference the knowledge base could draw conclusions about what to do or what went wrong.
 Garvey, Lowrance and Fischler also point out the possibility of constructing an evidential prepositional calculus similar Co plausible inference, and suggest coupling the measured estimates based on Dempster's rule with such an inference system.
 References Darnett 81, "Computational Mathematical Theory of Evidence'' IJCAI, August 1981.
 Methods for , submitted to 7th Colby '73, "Simulations of Belief Systems", Chapter Six, in "Computer Models of Thought and Language" Ed.
 Schank and Colby, W.
 H.
 Freeman and Co.
, San Francisco, 1973.
 Friedman '80a, "Reasoning by Plausible Inference", Proc.
 5th Conf.
 on Automated Deduction, Les Arcs, France, July 1980.
 SpringerVerlag, Berlin, 1980, pp.
 126142.
 (No.
 87 in the series "Lecture Notes in Computer Science".
) Friedman '80b, "TroubleShooting by Plausible Inference", Proc, First Nat.
 Conf.
 on AI, Aug.
 1821, 1980.
 pp 292294.
 Friedman '81, "Extended Plausible submitted to 7th IJCAI, August 1981.
 Inference" Garvey, Lowrance, and Fischler '81, "An Inference Technique for Integrating Knowledge from Disparate Sources", submitted to 7th IJCAI, August 1981.
 Rieger '76, "An Organization of Knowledge for Problem Solving and Language Comprehension", Artificial Intelligence, Vol.
 7, No.
 2, Summer 1976.
 Shafer '76, "A Mathematical Theory of Evidence", Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1976.
 Shortliffe and Buchanan '75, "A Model of Inexact Reasoning in Medicine", Math.
 Biosci.
 23, pp 351379, 1975.
 Shortliffe '76, "ComputerBased Medical Consultations:MYCIN", American Elsevier, New York, 1976, Chapter 4.
 Zadeh '65, "Fuzzy Sets", Information and Control 8, pp.
 338353, 1965.
 Summing up, extensions to both formal logic and likelihood theory are converging.
 The representation and propagation of subjective uncertainty in a knowledge base have been reduced to a set of logical and computational procedures which have prepositional calculus as a limiting case.
 Earlier attempts in cognitive science to model such phenomena include Colby's model of paranoia implemented in PARKY (Colby '73), and Rieger's use of inference to model language understanding (Rieger '76).
 The new methods have already been applied to a variety of problems in diagnosis, vision analysis, and noisy measurement.
 Their application to learning as a problem solving activity appears attractive.
 Further developments in the theory may be possible such as a modification of first order predicate calculus that represents uncertainty.
 151 Alf Zimmer Dept.
 Psych.
  University of Muenster  Fed.
 Rep.
 Germany Cultural Constraints on Cognitive Representation Starting from Kant's notion of schemata as being rules of synthesis, this paper atteirpts to dei/elop a unified characterization of innate and culturally mediated schemata.
 The core concept for this approach is the translation or transformation from one code to another or to some others, which preserve a set of invariants.
 It is argued that the alleged mechanism of transformation makes possible the development of schemata for complex externally mediated tasks, which are at variance with innate schemata, examples for such tasks are dancing tango or understanding perspective drawings.
 Such a notion of schema bears a strong structural similarity to algebraic groups with certain invariantpreserving transformations.
 This concept can bind together Helmholtz' 'unconscious conclusions' and Hering's explanation of perceptual constancies.
 It is suggested to apply heuristically the Gestalt principles and laws of perception as invariantpreserving transformations on the content of scherr.
ata.
 By means of an analysis of different tasks the heuristic value of this approach is demonstrated.
 Exactly 200 years ago Kant turned around the argurent of Berkeley and other Empiricists concerning the truth of abstract ideas, by stating that the apriory existence of certain rules makes possible the perception of particular instances as such and not vice versa.
1) The juxtaposition of aprioristic and Empiricist views of perception and representation of knowledge was n.
odified further by Helmholtz, who deronstrated that the geometry of the perccjrual space is not Euclidean under certain conditions.
 Therefore the imposed rules are net apriori but depend on the perceptual task and the cultural and/or phylogenetic development.
 An even more radical modification is stated in the SapirWhorf hypothesis, which pointed out the important intermediate role of language.
 Despite its apparent rel1)Nietzsche summarized the content of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason in a witticism: "The content is quite simple; Kant showed that the ordinary man is right about perception and that the scientists are wrong.
 Unfortunately this content is hidden in language, which can only be understood by scientists.
" evance for models of human knowledge representation the very role of cultural knowledge in the development and usage of individual knowledge has remained largely undefined.
 The comparison of the wellknown Necker cube in figure 1, and of a slightly varied form in figure 2 raises immediatly the question, why figure 2 appears to be more 'right'.
 Figures 1 i 2 Comparison of two ways to draw a cube Figure 1 parallel edges of the drawn object are mapped into parallel lines of the same length as in the drawn object Figure 2 parallel edges are drawn as lines with the same vcinishing point and the length of the lines depends on the perspective foreshorten ing 152 The answer that figure 2 is exactly drawn as we perceive a cube, is not quite convincing; for it provokes the further question, why the art of perspective drawing is a comparatively recent development (about 500 years old), why most people are not able to do it without instruction, and why in cultures not influenced by Western Renaissance art or Chinese art one does not find geometrical perspective.
 Even if these broader cultural considerations are not taken into account, there remains the puzzling question, why in the context of the cube drawings in figures 1 and 2 the slanted lines a and b in 2 are easily seen as the parallel edges of the right side of the cube, whereas the really parallel lines a' and b' in figure 1 do not elicit this impression as easily.
 Various investigations have corroborated the existence of perceptual regularities like the ones of Gestalt psychology; one striking example is the grouping due to the 'same fate' (e.
 g.
, parallel curves).
 If it is assumed that grouping parallel lines is an innate rule for information processing —and it is difficult to see how these lines coulf give rise to the impression of a cube otherwisel) then the equating of 'straight lines meeting in the same vanishing point' with 'parallel lines on a slanted plane' points out, how cultural constraints can influence the rules, which govern human information processing.
 This notion of rules, which allow the perception of spatial forms as such, is due to Kant in his argument against Berkeley's denial of truth in geometry (Critique of Pure Reason).
 Even if Kant's insisting on these rules as apriori truths is dismissed nowadays, his development of a schema theory gave rise to conceptualizations in psychology, which opened ways out of the paradoxical situations, into which overconfident reductionism had led psychology.
 In this context it suffices to reconstruct Kant's idea and some of its applications and further developments in order to point out, what a schema theoretic approach to the introductory problem could look like.
 Berkeley had stated that there can be no truth in geometry since theorems of geometry pertain to infinite classes of objects in space (e.
 g.
, triangles) .
 According to the empiristic criterion of truth as based on perception (esse est percipi), there cannot exist truth for infinite collections, because that would necessitate the storage of an infinite number of sense impressions (images) for each such class in the human brain.
 Kant (in 'Critique of Pure Reason') inverts Berkeley's argument by starting from the concept of rules giving rise to an infinite number of images, which can be paired with figures in space: 'The schema of the triangle can exist nowhere but in thought and signifies a rule of synthesis of the imagination in respect to its figures inspaoe.
"1) The connection between the figures in space and their representation in the human brain is made possible through active perception: ".
.
.
 imagination is a necessary ingredient of perception itself.
" And Kant resolves Berkeley's paradoxical conclusion about the storage of infinitely many images for abstract concepts, by coupling the abstract concept with the active device of the schema, which is able to produce all possible examples for a given concept: "These images can be connected with the concept only by means of the schema to which they belong.
 In themselves they are never completely at one with the concept.
" These ideas have had a strong influence on physiologists in the last century and in the beginning of this century: on Helmholtz and Hering in Germany, on Head in England.
 The transformations of Kant's schema theory by these scientists in turn influenced Gestalt psychology in continental Europe and Bartlett's conceptualization of psychology in England.
 Especially the application of this theoretical framework by Head and Bartlett has obscured the distinction between the abstract concept, the active schema, and the adhoc produced images.
 This led to such a vague definition of schema, that this label could be used to denote any steps in the chain of information procession, which seemed to be too complex to be analyzed further.
 Rumelhart (1980) and others have argued that for the concept of schema to play an important part in cognitive psychology, it is necessary to clarify its definition an d to develop mechanisms to test the feasibility of the concept.
 But even Rumelhart's notion of 'Schemata as Building Blocks of Cognition' organized in a hierarchical waŷ  seems to have certain weaknesses:  it necessitates the assumption of primitives in order to avoid infinite regress downwards, while lacking selfevident criteria of demarcation between schemata and primitives  it does not exclude a possible infinite regress upwards; there always is still another schema necessary to control the top most schema An alternative strategy to define the concept of schema and at the same time to circumvent some of the mentioned pitfalls, can start by going back to Kant's notion of schema as 'a rule of synthesis', which formed the theoretical framework for Helmholtz', Hering's and Gelb's explanations of constancies in human perception.
 Helmhotz: ".
.
.
 the law of sufficient reason is really nothing more than the DThere is an infinite number of two and three dimensional forms which are in agreement with the topologies of figure 1 and 2, which by the way are topologically equivalent.
 1)italics by the author 153 'urge' of our ceptions under knowledge and possible by th idea of invari cal problem of portance, has the most intui perception.
" intellect to bring all our percontrol.
" Hering: ".
.
.
 objective objective judgment are rendered is constancy," and Gelb: "The ance, which is an epistemologivalidity of the foremost imone of its roots, and perhaps tive one in the psychology of The search for such invariants and for the related classes of transformations formed the research program of Gestalt psychologists, as can be seen in Kohler's summing up the basic ideas of Ehrenfols: "It is characteristic of phenomenal forms that their specific proi:ierties remain unchanged, when the absolute data upon which they rest, undergo certain modification.
" In Gestalt psychology rules have been developed which pin down invariants and their transformations in perception: the 'laws' of grouping, of saliency (Pragnanz), etc.
 Unfortunately in the generalizations to more complex forms of human behavior much of the original clarity has been lost.
 Another limitation of the Gestalt approach is its nativistic orientation, which prevented Gestalt psychologists to realize the interaction between these innate rules and external (e.
 g.
, social or cultural) knowledge .
 Various analyses (e.
 g.
, Uttal, Julesz) have shown how the application of simple filters or auto and crosscorrelation techniques are able to detect regularities (e.
 g.
, figures) in apparently random patterns; these results are under certain conditions (types of symmetry, parallel curves, straight lines) the same ones, as one gets with human observers.
 If one takes the underlying rules, which enable the organism to detect forms in random noise or to discriminate between different forms, as the most primitive building blocks of perception, then it is possible to explain the emergence of schemata.
 These schemata can be defined as unique combinations of the primitive building blocks under constraints of the organism (e.
g.
, channel capacity, coding capacity) and the environment, upon which these schemata are applied.
 One major objection to this view could be that the invoked rules might be true only for certain modalities; the fact that 'Gestaltlaws' mostly stem from research in visual perception seems to corroborate this critique.
 What would be the consequence for an assumption of modality specific rules? At first it necessitates further nonanalyzable units, which make possible the translation from one sensory code into another, in order to explain highly integrated human activities such as scriptwriting (integration of kinesthetic, visual and 'symbolic' codes) or dancing, where kinesthetic, vestibular, and acoustic codes influence each other.
 These activities are not only highly learnable, but they exhibit the mentioned kind of integration from the very beginning (concededly in varying degrees).
 Furthermore it would be difficult under this assumption to explain synesthetics, the emergence of immediate impresslons/of similarity between experiences in different modalities (which give rise to selfexplaining similes and metaphors) or intermodal rivalry and its resolution.
 To sum up: The assumption of modality specific rules gives rise to a less parsimonious explanation of inner organismic communication.
 This hegative argument for modality independent rules can be supported by the demonstration of structurally equivalent rules in different codes: e.
 g.
 In grouping perceived objects the rules of linear succession and parallel movements exert strong influence.
 These very rules are structurally equivalent to the mechanism assumed for the solution of analogical problems by Rumelhart & Abrahamson (1973), as can be seen in figure 3: If b is linear succession of a, and b' is a linear succession of a', and if the movement from a to b and from a' to b' are parallel, then b' ist the solution of the analogical problem a : b = a' : ? a, b, a", and b' can stand for verbally stated concepts, for bodily movements, or for aooxistical phenomena, and thus can give rise to the resolution of such different tasks as finding the correct verbal expression, as doing the right legarm coordination in skiing, or as composing a fugue.
 It is apparent that in these applications only the set of rules remained invariant, whereas the internal as well as the external constraints changed totally.
 Figure 3 linear succession I a fc b parallel movement linear succession perceptual rules underlying analogical problems of type a : b = a' : 7 On the background of this discussion a schema is a set of primitive rules which are coupled in a unique combination under intraorganismic and extraorganismic constraints for a certain task.
 In the framework of this task the schema appears as a nofurtheranalyzable unit and can be considered as a pragmatic primitive.
 Task hierarchies then imply hierarchies of schema too, thus indicating that the focal point in the perception of the task hierarchy influences, what can be determined as a pragmatic primitive.
 Form this point of view the function of the schema can be assumed as twofold: ly 1 the generation of possible constellations (e.
 g.
, strings of symbols, sequences of movements, figures) and their comparison with perceived constellations H2 the extrapolation of future states of the organism and their comparison with perceived states.
 154 Whereas the former allows identification and classification of information and events, the latter makes selfregulated goaldirected behavior possible.
 A combination of both functions underlies behavior, which is regulated by external feedback.
 The influence of cultural constraints on the functioning of schemata can be observed best in instances, where the rules of the cultural constraints interfere with the rules of an either inborn schema (e.
 q.
, upright walking of humans with a characteristic armleg coordination) or an individually developed schema (e.
 g.
, certain motor patterns which make up the invidual characteristics of script, drawing, or gesticulation).
 Such an interference is mostly possible, if the existing schema can produce particulars (in Cassirer's sense) in agreement with the cultural constraints in the limiting case but not in the general casa.
 This situation can be clarified by two exanples from different domains.
 The cultural constraints on a mode of argumentation typical for the Western culture can be found in the rules of syllogistic reasoning.
 Psychological analyses of this task since Wertheimer have demonstrated, that formally equivalent problems lead to totally different patterns of successes and errors, and that framing, which does not alter the logical structure, influences the probability of success in a highly predictable way.
 If the rules of perception are taken as primitives for a schema of argumentation, then these rules, especially 'neighDorhood', 'succession', 'same fate', and 'parallel curves', can be taken as the underlying cause for JohnsonLaird's figurative effect as well as for the superiority of concrete problems over abstract problems of the same logical structure.
 The learning of movements in dancing is cinother example for the interference of cultural constraints with inborn schemata.
 Physiological as well as psychological analyses of human motor behavior have demonstrated that its apparent smoothness is due to CNScontrolled 'preenervations', which allow a very fast sequence of the same or different movements, e.
 g.
 in walking (same), or jumping (different).
 A necessary precondition of these 'preenervations' seems to be, that one movement follows the ather in 'a natural way'.
 If the perceptual rules are assu.
ned to characterize this 'natural way', then it becomes plausible, why tango seems to be one of the most difficult dances to learn.
 The initial sequence of steps makes use of the pattern of normal walking.
 Part of the walking schema is stopping, but in tango instead of a simple stop with subsequent change of direction a kind of oscillation of the body is prescribed, which is only found in this type of dancing.
 Thus the invariants of tango are incompatible with the schemata of walking as well as of other kinds of dancing.
 The obvious fact, that this movement can be learned nevertheless, may be made possible by the translation of the rhythmic invariants contained in the melody, into rhythmic patterns of bodily movements.
 The fact, that dancing tango without heard or imagined music is nearly impossible, makes this conclusion plausible.
 In order to resolve all the questions and vicious circles in relation to schema theory and its interdependence with cultural constraints a more detailed and experimentally corroborated theory is necessary than this admittedly uneven and loopholed sketch of an alternative starting point can be.
 Nevertheless it is hoped that at least it stimulates clarifying discussions about this central concept of cognitive psychology.
 These ideas have gained much from David Rumelhart's lectures and discussions with Jennifer Freyd and Regine May.
 The remaining lack of clarity must totally be contributed to the author 155 Some thoughts on logic, language, mind and reality Rachel Joffe Falmagne Clark University This discussion will be predicated upon the notion that adult human cognition includes an internalized system of logical relationships and principles, in other woras, that logic has some psychological reality in that at least a fragment of it is included in human competence.
 To avoid some likely misconstruals, it seems a good idea to state here what this discussion is not.
 It does not examine whether standard logic, as a complete system, adequately represents human reasoning  a question that has preoccupied psychologists and some philosophers for some time (e.
g.
 Cohen, in press)  nor does it attempt to determine whether an alternative logical system would be more suitable for this purpose as some psychologists have proposed.
 Nor does it take a stance in the debate regarding the adequate logical system in terms of logicians' and philosophers' criteria (ostensibly distinct from those of the psychologist).
 Rather it is assumed that some logic, possibly incomplete, is part of human knowledge; which form it has does not matter for the sake of the present discussion.
 Given this premise, the aims of this paper are (i) to provide a first step towards integration of some issues in philosophy of logic with analogous issues concerning human logical cognition, in particular to examine the relationships between logic and language and logic and reality from those two vantage points; (ii) to address some general questions concerning the development of logical cognition within that perspective.
 In relation to this second aim, I will argue, more generally, for the necessity of articulating the epistemological and developmental foundations of the cognitive functions or knowledge structures that we are investigating in cognitive science, if our account of those functions and structures is to have any genuine substance.
 The relationships between logic, language, and reality are notoriously controversial among philosophers and linguists.
 This paper cannot begin to give an adequate account of the debate and of its philosophical and conceptual ramifications, but as an oversimplified approximation, the issues that will concern us here, have to do with the nature of propositions as, alternatively, empirical linguistic, or subjective entities, and, correspondingly, whether logic is more properly ssen as formalizing necessary relations in the empirical world, or analytic relations within natural language.
 What follows is a schematic survey of a few alternative positions, limited to highlighting the relevant contrasts.
 Thus, for example, Carnap (1951) and Katz (1972), on different grounds, put forth a view of logical relations as linguistic relations, and characterize logical truths in terms of linguistic structures, taking sentences rather than abstract propositions as primitives.
 Putnam (1971), on the other hand "finds something ridiculous in the theory that logic is about sentences" (ibid, p.
6) and, in this article and others, defends a realist position with respect to the entities subsumed within logic (classes, properties, etc.
.
.
), and, presumably, with respect to logical truths.
 Frege (1918/1956) similarly "assigns to logic the task of discovering the laws of truth, not of assertion or thought" (ibid p.
289), thereby excluding both language and mind from the foundations of logic.
 Quine, on the other hand, argues against the distinction between analytic and synthetic truths (Quine, 1953) and, relatedly, sees logic as one part of a "whole interlocked scientific system", an integral part of any scientific prediction, and therefore ultimately revisable on the basis of empirical evidence (Quine, 1970); the close relations between logic and language are acknowledged but the foundations of logic are nonlinguistic (and, additionally, empirical).
 Interestingly, a somewhat analogous relationship between logic and other forms of knowledge, is present in Wittgenstein (1922/1961), despite the radical divergence of those two philosophers on most other matters: starting with the premise that the world is the totality of facts, the early Wittgenstein's thesis is that we picture facts to ourselves, that a picture is a model of reality, and has in common with it its pictorial form.
 A logical picture of reality is one which only has logical form in common with the reality it depicts; therefore, every picture is at the same time a logical picture.
 Thus, on this account logical relations do not have a status distinct from that of other modes of representing reality: they are grounded directly in the structure of events, as other modes of representation are, although they are more basic and of wider applicability.
 Analogous questions arise with respect to logical cognition and will be discussed here.
 They articulate with the general context of the philosophical issues just mentioned in two ways.
 First, examining human logical cognition entails assumptions about the nature of logical knowledge.
 Second, examining logical development entails assumptions about the sources from which logical knowledge is derived.
 Regarding the former question, the specific issue is whether logical knowle'dge primarily consists of knowledge about the structure of language or of knowledge about the structure of events in the empirical world.
 The psychological angle on this issue highlights considerations of a somewhat different kind than those of the philosopher.
 The concern is not so much about the foundations of logic but rather about the way in which logical knowledge articulates with the other components of an individual's knowledge structure.
 In an important sense, logical knowledge is knowledge about both language and the empirical world to the extent that language itself is semantically grounded in the empirical world to which pcirts of it refer.
 However, cognitively in terms of the organization of the mind  logical knowledge may or may not hinge on linguistic knowledge.
 Thus, for example, regardless of the fate of the philosophical debate about whether the notion of analytic truth is wellfounded, (e.
g.
 Quine, 1953; Putnam, 1962), one may ask whether, cognitively, people can discover new logical truths via linguistic structures exclusively  a cognitive analogue of the "analytic" situation.
 This question is seen most clearly when put in a developmental light, as will be done presently.
 The second question raised previously concerned the epistemology and development of logical cognition.
 It will be assumed here that logical knowledge is derived constructively both from linguistic and nonlinguistic sources.
 156 Regarding the linguistic foundation first, the assumption is that logical knowledge is derived both from awareness of the structure of language itself and from the correspondences between linguistically expressed propositions and empirical states of affairs, with the latter source of knowledge ensuring that the resulting logical system remains semantically sound and internally consistent (though not necessarily complete).
 More specifically, the initial comprehension of "logical" relations is certainly semantically based and contextually restricted, as has been shown in the language development literature for other kinds of relations.
 However, it seems compelling to assume that further eleiboration of these logical relations involves a process of abstraction from their initial contentbound meaning and an elaboration of their linguistic properties.
 The development of negation may be a paradigm example of this microdevelopmental process.
 Negation in the early stages of language development appears to signify disappearance or nonexistence, and it only subsequently emerges as a prepositional operator in children of 23 years of age (Pea, 1980).
 However, by age 5 or 6, it seems hardly questionable that the logical properties of negation are mastered by the child at a fairly abstract level, in the sense that the child knows that if a statement p is true, its negation is false across a wide range of contents and presumably on inferential grounds.
 Thus, negation initially appears to refer directly to the events or objects themselves, and its meaning is grounded in direct verification of the oresence or absence of these obiects.
 Further developments, however.
 are of a more "syntactic" kind, though presumably retaining the initial meaning as their semantic foundation.
 With regard to this later development, it is useful to remember that logic and syntax as formal systems, have a highly similar status with respect to natural language.
 Although the details of the parallel, its limitations, and the resulting issues are beyond the scope of this paper, it is enough to note that the two systems are alternative formalizations of natural language and that both logic and syntax interface with semantics, in ways that are partly similar.
 If one recognizes this parallel, it is then natural to look at both syntactic and logical development as a process of gradual structuring of the linguistic environment.
 Furthermore, it is natural to speculate that, in a way somewhat similar to the way in which the child learns to structure her/his linguistic environment syntactically (presumably by exploiting the interconnections between the syntactic, semantic and contextual aspects of language) s(he) may also be assumed to structure the linguistic environment in terms of what statements can be legitimately derived from what other statements, and under what conditions.
 Thus, what is suggested here is a process of abstraction of logical forms from content specific instances embodying this form.
 If, in addition, as some have proposed, logical and grammatical structures are in close correspondence, the acquisition of grammar and of logical forms would proceed concurrently in part.
 Turning now to the nonlinguistic sources of logical development, two positions are possible.
 Piaget takes the most radical option in locating the foundations of logical structures in the systems of actions of the child upon the world and in positing that logical relations are constructed by reflective abstraction on the properties of the world as apprehended by the child's actions (e.
g.
 Piaget and Inhelder, 1969).
 This is a radically nonlinguistic account.
 A different account can be given, based on the notion that, except for the very initial period of cognitive development, the events in the world and the relationships between these events can be represented mentally in terms of propositions, so that e.
g.
, valid patterns of inference can be abstracted from the structure of events in the world via prepositional encoding.
 An example will help concretize this notion: in observing the functioning of an electrical circuit possessing implicative properties (turning on either one of two switches, S^ or S, causes the same light to go on), a person may observe that, when the light is on, one does not know which switch has been used  a typical indeterminate conditional inference.
 Coming back to the earlier part of this discussion, if logic is seen as formalizing necessary relations in the empirical world, observations of the kind just sketched may provide a direct, (ostensibly) nonlinguistic foundation for such logical knovSledge.
 So far, abstraction of logical knowledge from linguistic and nonlinguistic sources, has been discussed in general terms.
 A mechanism implementing this conception will be outlined, extending notions discussed in Falmagne (1980), in which various modes of representation of linguistic and nonlinguistic information are assumed to be possible (the formal mode being one of them, and mental models as proposed by JohnsonLaird (1980) being another) and in which functional and developmental relationships between those modes of representation are described.
 This conception is somewhat parallel, in a mentalistic way, to the early Wittgensteinian notions discussed earlier, and the way in which perhaps logical forms are abstracted from the structure of mental models together with the operations carried out on them, will be discussed.
 The preceding discussion should not be mistaken as reflecting an empiricist epistemology.
 It seems clear to me that a strictly empiricist account of logical development and a strictly rationalist account are equally untenable and, furthermore, intellectually unappealing.
 An assumption that seems more apt, both on empirical and philosophical grounds, is that natural logic is both constrained and made possible by fundamental properties of the mind  minimally by fundamental cognitive ways of processing experience.
 What should be invoked on the "constraint" side is far from being clear at this point.
 Some proposals whose relevance to the present issue needs to be examined or developed are notions of natural connectives, (Osherson, 1977) notions of conceptual naturalness, and, with some qualifications, some linguists' quest for linguistic universals.
 On the "positive" side, regarding those properties of the mind that make natural logic possible, one of these basic cognitive functions is the human capacity for abstraction, which provides the mechanism for emergent discontinuities in modes of thinking and of processing language in the course of development or of learning (those discontinuities which radical empiricism is poorly equipped to account for).
 In the same way as this capacity permits the child to acquire a linguistic medium which stands in a symbolic relation to the referent world, and, later on, to undergo the formal structuring underlying advanced syntactic development, perhaps it permits for logical forms and logical truths themselves, to be abstracted from language (and nonlinguistic experience), as 157 has been proposed here.
 Thus, the program as I see it is to understand the interplay between learning mechanisms, and the cognitive constraints and possible a priori dispositions within which learning operates.
 References Carnap, R.
 The logical syntax of language.
 Paterson, N.
J.
! Littlefield, 1959 (first published in 1937).
 Cohen, L.
J.
 Can human irrationality be experimentally demonstrated? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, in press.
 Falmagne, R.
J.
 The development of logical competence: a psycholinguistic perspective.
 In Kluwe, R.
 fi Spada, H.
 (Eds.
), Developmental models of thinking.
 Academic Press, 1980, pp.
171197.
 Frege, G.
 The thought: a logical inquiry.
 Mind, 1956, 65, 289311.
 (First written in 1918) JohnsonLaird, P.
N, Mental models in cognitive science.
 Cognitive Science, 1980, 4̂ , 71115.
 Katz, J.
J.
 Semantic theory.
 Harper and Row, 1972.
 Osherson, D.
 Natural connectives: a Chomskyan approach.
 Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1977, 16, 129.
 Pea, R.
 Development of negation in early child language.
 In D.
 Olson (Ed.
), The social foundations of language and thought.
 Norton, 1980.
 Piaget, J.
 S Inhelder, B.
 The early growth of logic in the child.
 Routledge and Kegan, 1964.
 Putncun, H.
 Philosophy of logic.
 Harper and Row, 1971.
 Putnam, H.
 The analytic and the synthetic.
 In Feigl, H.
 S Maxwell, G.
 (Eds.
), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, III.
 University of Minnesota Press, 1962.
 Quine, W.
V.
 Philosophy of logic.
 PrenticeHall, 1970.
 Quine, W.
V.
 Two dogmas of empiricism.
 In W.
V.
O.
 Quine, From a logical point of view.
 Harvard University Press, 1953, pp.
2046.
 Wittgenstein, L.
 Tractatus logicophilosophicus.
 Routledge and Kegan, 1961.
 (First English edition in 1922) 158 Time and Cognition: The Domestication of the Maya Mind Hugh Gladwin University of California, Irvine In his provocative book The Domestication of the Savage Mind Jack Goody argues that the advent of writing has profoundly altered the growth and structure of human knowledge, and beyond that, human cognition itself: Writing is critical not simply because it preserves speech over time and space, but because it transforms speech, by abstracting its components, by assisting backward scanning, so that communication by eye creates a different cognitive potentiality for human beings than communication by word of mouth.
 (Goody 1977:128) Goody argues that the making of written tables and lists has expanded the potential of cognitive activities.
 The list, he says, is connected in a direct and intimate way with cognitive processes.
 For the making of lists, actual or figurative, that I have called shopping lists is part of the more general process of planning human action.
 .
 .
 .
 It is not so much the making of plans, the use of symbolic thought, as the externalizing and communication of those plans, transactions in symbolism, that are the marks of man.
 .
 .
 .
 [list making] represents one aspect of the process of decontextualization (or better 'recontextualization') that is intrinsic to writing, not merely as an external activity but as an internal one as well.
 To put the matter in another way, writing enables you to talk freely about your thoughts.
 (p.
 159) The book concludes that writing encourages special forms of linguistic activity associated with developments in particular kinds of problem raising and problem solving, in which the list, the formula, and the table played a seminal part.
 If we wish to speak of the 'savage mind', these were some of the instruments of its domestication.
 (p.
 162).
 In this paper I suggest that Goody's argument fits well with a view of cognition which was dominant in the 1960's.
 But the last decade's developments in cognitive theory have made Goody's conclusions about the effect of writing on human cognition less tenable (of necessity my review here is cryptic; see Colby, Fernandez and Kronenfeld's [1981] coverage of the same ground from a slightly different viewpoint).
 1 will illustrate these points with a brief example from well known facts about Maya arithmetic and chronological reckoning.
 First, I should note that there are many of Goody's arguments that I find very convincing.
 Surely writing has facilitated an explosive growth in human knowledge stored in libraries, data banks, and other places.
 This growth in stored knowledge, along with the growth in size and role differentiation of modern society, makes learning even the small fraction of knowledge one must have to be a competent member of society a staggering task (D'Andrade 1980:23).
 And writing has changed many activities, such as most of the arts: the act of composing music, and of writing poetry and plays is now usually separate from the performance.
 This is so much so that Aaron Copeland noted recently that, as a composer, conducting for him was a great joy  ".
.
.
 it might not be as good as somebody else's interpretation, but nevertheless it's the way you thought of it".
 And the performance of performances, as with the performances of many tasks, has changed radically with the advent of writing.
 It is hard to take exception to Goody's arguments on these topics.
 It is Goody's extension of the argument to cognition itself that I want to question.
 His argument is very subtle: writing reinforces the cognitive facility to represent concepts by symbols (words) which can be moved around into lists, tables, and formulae.
 In purely oral speech one is always in the "flow of speech", and rarely conscious of individual words (Goody 1977:115).
 Writing, on the other hand, allows one to reflect on concepts, operate logically on them, and categorize them.
 This view of Goody's is congenial with the view of language and cognition which was dominant in the 1960's.
 In anthropology frames which could be elicited in speech were used to generate lists, tables, and formulae which were thought to accurately reflect cognition.
 If this activity is a fundamental part of cognition, then surely Goody is right in thinking that writing reinforces an important type of cognitive activity.
 In anthropology and in transformational linguistics meaning was seen as being composed of the semantics of individual words (often representable in feature notation) plus the logical functions operating on the different parts of the sentence generated by the syntax.
 It was a view of language and cognition which was very precise and operational.
 Even anthropologists occasionally used the expression "machine translation" to express the ultimate goals of cognitive science.
 Again, if this is cognition, writing should train and expand it.
 In the 1970's another view of the relationship between language and cognition asserted itself.
 This position was not new; F C.
 Bartlett stated it in 1932, and it has always had advocates in some areas of philosophy.
 In essence this view argues that the main "work" in communication involves memory structures (schemas) often loosely connected with language.
 Semantics is thus, demoted to the accessing of memory schemas.
 As I once put it.
 In schema theory the job of semantics is not to completely define words, but rather to show how words are related to memory schemas in the interpretation of sentences.
 When two people are talking they use arbitrary sound signals, words in sentences, and there must be some basis for agreement between them on what knowledge the words and sentences refer to.
 Semantics is the basis for this agreement.
 (Gladwin 1972, 35) 159 Roger Schank's first presentation of the conceptual dependency model of processes underlying the production and interpretation of conversation, as well as the later work by him and his colleagues, (Schank 1972, Schank and Abelson 1977) also posited a much looser view of the relationship between phonology/syntax on one hand and conceptual structures (memory) on the other.
 A branch of transformational linguistics, generative semantics, grew ever more elaborate semantic trees, which began to look more like models of cognitive process than semantic operations closely tied to syntactic and phonological rules.
 Few of these cognitive researchers deny the brilliant achievements of Chomsky and his followers in syntax and phonology, but they argue that the syntactic and phonological structures of speech are generated and interpreted almost automatically, outside the conscious attention of speaker or hearer.
 The thread of the conversation is carried by conceptual structures which seem unlike either syntactic trees or componential paradigms.
 Recent work further emphasizes the focus on conceptual structures.
 Lakoff and Johnson (1980), argue that metaphor, a cognitive analogy, is fundamentally important in the production and interpretation of speech and text; Quinn (1980) has employed the analysis of metaphor in understanding the conversations of people about their marriages.
 Most current work on folk tales emphasizes conceptual rather than syntactic structures (Colby 1981).
 Brown and Suchman (1981) have argued that the powerful concepts underlying skilled technical behavior are based on qualitative comparison with devices which are known to work in ways similar to the device involved in the task to be performed.
 Precise quantitative calculation and logical deduction seem relatively less important than had been thought.
 The Brown and Suchman argument has much in common with other work on cognitive structures underlying highly skilled behavior, work which departs markedly from the logic and languagebased model of skilled, intelligent thought.
 It was once widely assumed that chess masters, for example, could operate logically and deductively on the symbols and tokens of chess to evaluate many moves ahead to the consequences of current possible moves.
 But Chase and Simon (1973) found that the first moves master players attend to are usually the best moves: "Masters invariably explore strong moves, whereas weak players spend considerable time analyzing the consequences of bad moves.
 The best move, or at least a very good one, just seems to come to the top of a master's list of plausible moves for analysis" (1973:216).
 They also found that the memory context in which best moves are "recognized" is associated with known board configurations; when presented with randomly generated board configurations masters did much worse than when dealing with configurations likely to occur in actual play.
 The Chase and Simon study illustrates two aspects of cognitive processes underlying highly skilled behavior which have recently been noted.
 First, the memories recalled are highly dependent on task environments (e.
g.
 board configurations).
 Work by members of the Adult Math Skills Project at U.
 C.
 Irvine (1979, 1980, 1981, Lave 1981) has emphasized the interaction of task environment and skill knowledge, interaction resulting in a notion of "situational memory" closely analogous to the memory of board configurations in the Chase and Simon study.
 The Brown and Suchman study emphasizes analogies between devices engineers (and copier operators) know and ones they are trying to figure out.
 Devices become well known in a given task environment.
 Second, the process of figuring out what to do in skilled behavior seems to work much more like a recognition task than a deductive task.
 One "sees" the situation of the task, and "recognizes" what to do, like the chess masters see the board and recognize what to do.
 Much of the actual problemsolving is accomplished preattentively and before the setting up of what Newell and Simon (1972) would c^ll the "problem space": the problem that people attentively consider and can verbally report on.
 At this point in my paper some readers are bound to object that cognitive processes underlying skilled problem solving may seem like recognition, and may seem to be environmentally situated, but a model of the competence required to perform the task need not be concerned with where a task is situated, or whether its performance is consciously attended to or not.
 This objection may or may not be valid (it's not the purpose of this paper to debate it).
 My argument is rather that attention and performance greatly affect learning, and in the long run would affect the cumulative expansion of cognitive ability that Goody argues writing brings about.
 In other words, it's hard to learn something you don't understand or are not aware of.
 The research reported on here argues that understanding is based largely on conceptual operations, like metaphor and qualitative comparison.
 And awareness of a task is usually of a task in its environment.
 It thus seems to me unlikely the "recontextualization" of task instructions, for example, to printed formulae or tables, will in and of itself improve learning or cognitive skills in general.
 It is less likely to facilitate learning if the task context is completely removed from the written dscription of the task itself.
 Furthermore, the task is almost certainly unlearnable if the conceptual operations fundamental to its performance are not presented.
 The argument can be restated In terms of a distinction made by Roy D'Andrade at the Cognitive Science Conference last year in New Haven.
 He makes a distinction between what he calls "content based" abstraction and "formal language" abstraction.
 Content based abstraction is abstraction situated In one context.
 He illustrates content based abstraction with a chess example similar to the one from Chase and Simon cited above.
 Formal language abstraction "involves receding the problem into a different symbol system" (1980:13).
 On the face of it, formal language abstraction appears like the 60's notion of semantics and cognition discussed above.
 It is certainly close to Goody's notion of what would be encouraged by the development of writing.
 But the "70's" position would take exception to D'Andrade's implicit assertion that only formal language abstraction can be receded U a different semantic domain.
 If we take the view that semantics Includes only pointers to and from memory structures, the receding wiAA taV.
e pAace \\ memory structures, not in semantics or formal language.
 Metaphors and Brown and Suchman's 160 qualitative reasoning are much more likely candidates for memory devices which permit "abstraction" from one domain to another.
 I am thus arguing that we are most of the time more like Goody's savages than domesticated people (excepting, of course, logicians and poets).
 Can the written word help a savage? It can, but only if it allows easy translation in terms of the powerful memory devices needed to perform a task.
 This is why, as D'Andrade notes, humans often have difficulty learning procedures which require formal language abstraction.
 In the Adult Math Skills Project we have found that important among of the powerful memory devices for performing measurement calculation and estimation are highly overlearned structures and operations in which the perception of a measure is associated with a quantity.
 We have called these "canonical units".
 An example would be knowing that a football field is as big as an acre.
 Unfortunately British/U.
S.
 measure, while it does access canonical units, does not usually translate well.
 Most Americans do not know how many feet are on the side of an acre, or how many acres are in a square mile.
 The corresponding facts are probably known by a much larger proportion of the people who use hectares instead of acres.
 My argument, then, is that the use of the metric system might very well improve its user's cognitive procedures for spatial calculation and estimation.
 But I doubt if the ability to write down numbers in and of itself improves the ability to calculate.
 There is one area (besides logic and poetry) where formal language abstraction and writing per se is important.
 That is the environment where formal abstraction and deduction is required whether or not it facilitates learning: school.
 But that is a subject for another paper.
 1 will conclude with a comparison of the Western and the Maya systems for calculating dates and elapsed time between dates.
 Both systems permit the generation of lists, tables, and formulae linking dates and events, operating calendars, etc.
 But the Maya system appears much more likely to have facilitated the "domestication" of the cognition of its users than the Western.
 It should be first noted that the Maya were not so concerned as we are to be able to calculate to a given point in the solar year.
 In our system most everyone knows that January 1st falls at the same time in the solar year (i.
e.
 in the same part of winter in the U.
S.
).
 They'were more concerned with "translatability" in the sense that I have used it here.
 That is, they wanted to have the units of the calendar correspond to canonical units of time.
 They also wanted the units of time to correspond to basic arithmetic operations.
 An example of correspondence with arithmetic operations is the metric system of measure, in which most measures are multiples of ten, corresponding to a base ten arithmetic.
 For the Maya the 360 day year was sufficiently close to the solar year to serve as a canonical unit, and 360 translated both into the Maya arithmetic system and the calculations astronomers wished to perform.
 Maya arithmetic is most cotmonly written in a bar and dot notation.
 Dots are units and bars are marks for tallying at five.
 Tallying at five is Important for a commercially useful arithmetic since five is within the subitizing range (Klahr 1973, Adult Math Skills Project 1979).
 Given the growing appreciation of the importance of trade in Maya history (Rathje 1971), we can understand why a tally at five system was very useful.
 The abacus is another commercially used example of a system which tallies at five.
 An "integer" in Maya arithmetic is composed of a combination of bars and dots up to 19.
 This is followed by a shelllike figure for zero.
 The system is base 20, and the "digits" ("vigits"?) are usually written vertically.
 Only a slight modification is then needed to bring the system into correspondence with the canonical units of time.
 The third "digit" is base 18 rather than base twenty, giving a unit of 360 days (the tun).
 The calendar thus has the following units: baktun 400 "years" katun 20 "years" tun one "year", 18 "months", 360 "days" kin one "month" uinal 20 "days" one "day" What the metric system does for spatial and weight measure, the Mayan system does for time.
 Given two dates in the Western calender, on the other hand, it is a tedious task to figure how many days elapsed between two dates.
 Most people have to resort to counting.
 But in the Maya system calculation of the interval between two dates is done almost as easily as a user of the metric system can find the difference between 238 cm.
 and 5.
126 m.
 More information on Maya arithmetic and calendrics can be found in Thompson 1960, Marcus 1976, Aveni 1976, and in the delightful but, alas, out of print book by George I.
 Sanchez (1961).
 I can thus conclude that both Western and Mayan calendars heavily employ writing, list making, and tabulation.
 But I would argue that the Mayan system is a powerful amplifier of chronological cognition, while the Western calendar is not.
 Goody is right in seeing writing as "domesticating" the savage mind.
 But he is wrong in thinking the effect is global; it only works when the writing system translates powerful memory processes well.
 161 REFERENCES CITED Adult Math Skills Project 1979 Hugh Gladwin.
 Memory Models from Psychology, Anthropology and AI: Are Any Useful in Understanding Adult Mathematical Problem Solving.
 Paper presented at the Riverside Conference on Cognition.
 1980 Michael Murtaugh, Katherine Faust, and Olivia de la Rocha.
 Everyday ProblemSolving Events.
 Paper presented at the American Anthropological Association Meetings, Washington, D.
C.
 1981 Olivia de la Rocha, Michael Murtaugh and Jean Lave.
 A Conceptual Framework for Locating Cognitive Process in Daily Life.
 Presentation at Society for Research in Child Development Workshop, Laguna Beach, California.
 Aveni, Anthony F.
 1978 Old World and New World NakedEye Astronomy.
 Technology Review 81:6072.
 Bartlett, Frederic C.
 1932 Remembering: A Study in Experimental and Social Psychology.
 Cambridge University Press.
 Brown, John Seely and Lucy Suchman 1981 Presentation at Workshop on the Social Context of the Development of Everyday Cognitive Skills, Society for Research in Child Development, Laguna Beach, California.
 Chase, William and Herbert Simon 1973 The Mind's Eye in Chess.
 Jjn Visual Information Processing.
 W.
 G.
 Chase, Editor.
 pp.
 215281.
 New York: Academic Press.
 Colby, Benjamin N.
 and Lore M.
 Colby 1981 The DayKeeper: the Life and Discourse of an Ixil Diviner.
 Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
 Colby, Benjamin N.
, James W.
 Fernandez, and David Kronenfeld 1981 Toward a Convergence of Cognitive and Symbolic Anthropology.
 American Ethnologist 8.
3.
 D'Andrade, Roy G.
 1980 The Cultural Part of Cognition.
 Address given to the 2nd Annual Cognitive Science Conference, New Haven.
 Klahr, David 1973 Quantification Processes (pp.
 334) and A Production System for Counting, Subitizing and Adding (pp.
 527546).
 hi Visual Information Processing.
 W.
 G.
 Chase, editor.
 New York: Academic Press.
 Lakoff, George and Mark N.
 Johnson 1980 Metaphors We Live By.
 Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
 Lave, Jean 1981 Tailored Learning: Education and Cognitive Skills Among Tribal Craftsmen in West Africa, ms.
, U.
C.
 Irvine.
 Marcus, Joyce 1976 The Origins of Mesoamerican Writing.
 Annual Reviews of Anthropology 5:3567.
 Newell, Alan and Herbert A.
 Simon 1972 Human Problem Solving.
 Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: PrenticeHall.
 Quinn, Naomi 1980 Committment in American Marriage: the Conceptual Structure of a Key Word.
 Paper presented at the American Anthropological Association Meetings, Washington, D.
C.
 Rathje, William L.
 " "" 1971 The Origin and Development of the Classic Lowland Maya.
 American Antiquity 36: 275285.
 Sanchez, George I.
 1961 Arithmetic In Maya.
 Austin, Texas, privately printed.
 Schank, Roger C.
 1972 Conceptual Dependency: A Theory of Natural Language Understanding.
 Cognitive Psychology 3:552631.
 Schank, Roger C, and Robert Abel son 1977 Scripts, Plans, Goals, and Understanding.
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
 Thompson, J.
 Eric S.
 1960 Maya Hieroglyphic Writing: an Introduction.
 Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
 Gladwin, Hugh 1972 Semantics, Schemata and Kinship.
 Paper presented at Mathematics in the Social Sciences Board Conference on Semantic Models in Kinship.
 Riverside, California.
 Gladwin, Hugh and Michael Murtaugh 1980 The AttentivePreattentive Distinction in Agricultural Decision Making.
 In Agricultural Decision Making: Anthropological Contributions to Rural Development.
 Peggy Barlett, Editor.
 pp.
 115135.
 New York: Academic Press.
 Goody, Jack 1977 The Domestication of the Savage Mind.
 Cambridge University Press.
 162 Why some modified class inclusion tasks are easy for young children: A process model for finding referents of labels In arrays Adele A.
 Abrahamsen New School for Social Research Inhelder & Piaqet's standard class inclusion problem involves the presentation of an array, e.
g.
, five toy horses and three toy dogs, and the posing of a question concerning the larger subordinate class (A^) and the superordinate class (A): "Are there more horses or more animals?" Children younger than about eight years usually say "More horses.
" Where do they go wrong? Wilkinson (1976) has suggested the use of a strategy that forbids doublecounting.
 He outlines a SCAN procedure that young children apply only once (avoiding doublecounting), and older children apply twice.
 Despite the intuitive appeal of this model, there is evidence that children have difficulties correctly assigning referents in certain related tasks using nonincluded sets, for which doublecounting is not at issue (McGarrigle, Grieve & Hughes, 1978; Isen, Riley, Tucker & Trabasso, 1975).
 Conversely, Markman (1973) showed that children perform well on included sets if the more inclusive set is a collection, e.
g.
, "family," rather than a class.
 Finally, Trabasso, Isen, Dolecki, McLanahan, Riley i Tucker (1978) reviewed a number of modified class inclusion tasks for which performance is modestly or dramatically better than for the standard task.
 Though Trabasso et al.
 interpreted the findings in terms of eight component processes in class inclusion, they emphasized that the standard task encourages children to identify the smaller subordinate class as the referent of the superordinate term, whereas many of the modified tasks make* the superordinate reference unambiguous.
 In this paper I expand on that insight by outlining two simple process models for finding the referents of labels in arrays, and showing that these models can account for younger and older children's performance on standard tasks and on those modified tasks which elicit dramatic improvements.
 Process A (for younger children) I propose that young children proceed as follows for class inclusion and related problems: 1.
 They exhaustively partition the array of objects into mutually exclusive sets.
 I assume that they tend to maximize similarity within sets and minimize similarity between sets, hence favoring small sets, but I do not model this procedure.
 2.
 They seek referents for labels by conducting a selfterminating search of the sets.
 3.
 They permit the referent sets of two labels to intersect (i.
e.
, doublecounting), but they cannot be identical; a search that would otherwise be terminated will continue to avoid this.
 Figures 1 and 2 show modified flow charts of the two most important procedures of Process A.
 These are incomplete, but are detailed enough to address the gross empirical data, and are similar in format to Wilkinson's (1976) flow charts to facilitate comparison.
 It is assumed that the child has constructed two lists: a list S* of the sets in the array and a list L* of verbal labels.
 Any relevant noun phrase in the class inclusion question or in the immediate verbal context is included in L*.
 The procedure LINK acts on these lists, linking labels to sets, and keeping track of the linkages by constructing a third list of labels and their referents: (L.
REF)* LINK processes every label in turn, getting its definition and calling the procedure SETSEARCH to find a matching set description.
 Once a set is found to have a matchino description (by the procedure MATCH, not detailed here), the search terminates unless the result is a reference already "claimed" by another label, as determined by the procedure COMPARE.
 Whenever a set is "claimed" by a label, it is marked as used (#) and moved to the end of the list S*.
 After all labels have been processed, LINK uses LASTSEARCH to try once again to make a linkage for any remaining unclaimed sets.
 This is not detailed here, but for each such set a selfterminating search of the labels is performed.
 Process B (for older children) Process B conducts an exhaustive search of the sets for each label, and pprmits two labels to have identical referent sets.
 Intermediate processes incorporating only one of these two changes are of course possible.
 The changes primarily affect SETSEARCH (see Figure 3), but the exhaustive search feature makes the check for leftover sets in LINK unnecessary.
 Process B obtains the correct answer to standard class inclusion problems, unless the labels are defined too narrowly to match atypical sets.
 Evidence Figures 3 and 4 trace the highlights of Processes A and B, respectively, as applied to several versions of class inclusion tasks.
 Th°  standard task is followed by tasks in which both subordinate labels are made salient (Ahr & Youniss, 1970; Winer, 1974) and in which several subordinate classes appear in the array (McLanahan, 1976); these versions are easy for young children.
 Last, three conditions involving atyoical classes are shown (Carson & Abrahamson, 1976); these are difficult even for some older children.
 With minor modification.
 Process A can also handle the findings of Markman (1973).
 The definition of a collection specifies its constituents, e.
g.
, a set of parents and a set of children are the constituents of a family.
 A precedure CONSTITUENT could be inserted into LINK; it would call SETSEARCH separately for each constituent.
 Processes A and B account well for the gross data.
 They could be tested more stringently by testing their processing sequences against detailed records.
 References Ahr, P.
 & Youniss, J.
 Reasons for failure on the classinclusion problem.
 Child Development, 1970, 41_, 131143.
 Carson, M.
 T.
 & Abrahamson, A.
 Some members are more equal than others: The effect of semantic typicality on classinclusion performance.
 Child Development, 1976, 47, 11861190.
 Isen, A.
 M.
, Riley, C.
 A.
, Tucker, T.
 & Trabasso, T.
 The facilitation of class inclusion by use of multiple comparisons and twoclass perceptual displays.
 Paper presented at the meeting of SRCD, Denver, Colorado, April 1975.
 Markman, E.
 The facilitation of partwhole comparisons by use of the collective noun "family.
" Child Development, 1973, 44, 837840.
 McGarrigle, J.
, Grieve, R.
 & Hughes, M.
 Interpreting inclusion: A contribution to the study of the child's cognitive and linguistic development.
 Journal of Experimental Child Psychology.
 1978, 26, 528550.
 McLanahan, A.
 G.
 The classinclusion problem: An information processing interpretation.
 Senior Honors Thesis, Princeton University, 1976.
 163 Trabasso, T.
, Isen, A.
 M.
, Ooleckl, P.
, McLanahan, A.
 G.
, Riley, C.
 A.
 & Tucker, T.
 How do children solve classinclusion problems? In R.
 S.
 Siegler (Ed.
), Children's Thinking: What Develops? Hillsdale, N.
 J.
:—Eribautn, 1978.
— Wilkinson, A.
 Counting strategies and semantic analysis as applied to class inclusion.
 Cognitive Psychology, 1976, 8, 6485.
 Winer, G.
 A.
 An analysis of verbal facilitation of class inclusion reasoning.
 Child Development, 1974, 45, 224227.
 NIL f LINK(L*,S*,(L,REF'm Find the next label L in L* Make the reference of L empty: REF Get the definition of L: DEF REF = SETSEARCH(S*,REF,DEF,(L,EXT)*) Form the pair (L.
REF) Move (L,REF) to (L,REF)* End of L * ? — Yesi AVI S in S* used?—"VesiNo I No I I Delete every #S from S i Exit LINK LASTSEARCH I Figure 1.
 Modified flow chart of the LINK procedure used by both Process A and Process B (boxed section needed only for Process A).
 ( SETSEARCH(S*,REF,DEF,(L,EXT)*)~) Find the next set S in S* Get the description of S: DES M MATCH(DEF,DES) M = NIL? Y e s — End of S*?— Y e s — ? No No Copy S into REF SETSEARCH Mark S as used: #S Move S to end of S* V COMPARE(REF,(L.
REF)*) V CLAIMED?— Y e s — End of S*?— Y e s — ? No No Exit SETSEARCH J Yes— Exit ( SETSEARCH(S*.
REF,DEF,(L,EXT") Find the next set S in S* Get the description of S: DES M = MATCH(DEF,DES) M NIL? Y e s — End of S*?No No Copy S into REF SETSEARCH End of S*?_Yes—Exit No SETSEARCH Figure 2.
 Modified flow chart of the SETSEARCH procedure used by Processes A (top) and B (bottom).
 Standard task; Carson & Abrahamsen (1976) tyoicaltypical condition.
 5 horses 4 3 dogs.
 L LI L2 "Horses, Animals" S*: HORSES, DOGS "Horses"/HORSESMatchOK/ S*: DOGS, #HORSES "Animals"/DOGSMatchOK/ S*: #HORSES, #DOGS Result: 5 "horses" & 3 "animals" so "More horses" Ahr & Youniss (1970); Winer (1974).
 5 horses 3 dogs.
 "Horses, Dogs.
 Animals" S*: HORSES, DOGS 1?̂  LI L2 L3 "Horses"/HORSESMatchOK/ S*: DOGS, IHORSES "Dogs"/DOGSMatchOK/ S*: #HORSES.
 #DOGS "Anima1s"/H0RSESMatchBut claimed, so try more /DOGSMatchRef of HORSES & DOGS is OK/ Result: 5 "horses" & 8 "animals" so "More animals" McLanahan (1976).
 4 horses, 2 dogs, 2 cats, 2 pigs.
 L*: "Horses, Animals" S*: HORSES.
 DOGS, CATS, PIGS LI: "Horses"/HORSESMatchOK/ S*: DOGS.
 CATS, PIGS, #HORSES L2: "Anima1s"/00GSMatch0K/ S*: CATS, PIGS, #HORSES, #DOGS Have reached end of L*, but some sets unused.
 Delete used sets to get S*:CATS,PIGS.
 Do LASTSEARCH.
 SI: CATS/"Horses"Mismatch/"Anima1s"Match0K/ S2: PIGS/"Horses"Mismatch/"Anima1s"Match0K/ Result: 4 "horses" & 6 "animals" so "More animals" Carson & Abrahamson (1976) atypicalatyoical condition.
 5 bees & 3 flies.
 L*: "Bees, Animals'^ S*: BEES, FLIES LI: "Bees"/BEESMatchOK/ S*: FLIES, #BEES L2: "Animals"/FLIESMismatch/#BEESMismatch/ Have reached end of L*.
 but one set unused.
 Delete used set to get S*: FLIES.
 Do LASTSEARCH.
 SI: FLIES/"Bees"Mismatch/"Anima1s"Mismatch/ Result: 5 "bees" & 0 "animals" so "More bees" Carson & Abrahamson (1976) atypicaltypical condition.
 5 bees & 3 dogs.
 LI L2 "Bees, Animals" S*: BEES, DOGS "Bees"/BEESMatchOK/ S*: DOGS, #BEES "Anima1s"/D0GSMatch0K/ S*: #BEES, #DOGS Result: 5 "bees" & 3 "animals" so "More bees" Carson & Abrahamson (1976) typicalatypical condition.
 5 horses & 3 flies.
 L*: "Horses, Animals" S*: HORSES, FLIES LI: "Horses"/HORSESMatchOK/ S*: FLIES, #HORSES L2: "Animals"/FLIESMismatch/#HORSESMatchBut claimed, and no more sets to try.
 What to do? Result: varies.
 Some compare the 5 HORSES to the 3 FLIES and answer "More horses" Figure 3.
 Process A as a model of younger children's performance in several class inclusion studies: Highlights of possible sequences.
 164 Standard task; Carson S Abrahamson (1976) typicaltypical condition.
 5 horses 8.
 3 dogs.
 1*: "Horses, Animals" S*; HORSES, DOGS LI: "Horses"/HORSESMatch/DOGSMismatch/ L2: "Animals"/HORSESMatch/DOGSMatch/ Result: 5 "horses" & 8 "animals" so "More animals" Ahr i Youniss (1970); Winer (1974).
 5 horses 3 dogs L LI L2 L3 "Horses, Doqs, Animals" S*: HORSES, DOGS "Horses"/HORSESMatch/DOGSMismatch/ "Doqs"/HORSESMismatch/DOGSMatch/ "Animals"/HORSESMatch/DOGSMatch/ Result: 5 "horses" S 8 "animals" so "More animals" McLanahan (1976).
 4 horses, 2 doqs, 2 cats, 2 pigs.
 L*: "Horses.
Animals" S*: HORSES, DOGS, CATS, PIGS LI: "Horses"/HORSESMatch/DOGSMismatch/ CATSMismatch/PIGSMismatch/ L2: "Animals"/HORSESMatch/DOGSMatch/ CATSMatch/PIGSMatch/ Result: 4 "horses" & 8 "animals" so "More animals" Carson & Abrahamson (1976) atypicalatypical condition.
 5 bees * 3 flies.
 L* LI L2 Result: 5 "bees" & 0 "animals" so "More bees" "Bees, Animals" S*: BEES, FLIES "Bees"/BEESMatch/FLIESMismatch/ "Animals"/BEESMismatch/FLIESMismatch/ Carson & Abrahamson (1976) atypicaltypical condition.
 5 bees & 3 dogs.
 L*: "Bees, Animals" S*: BEES, DOGS LI: "Bees"/BEESMatch/DOGSMismatch/ L2: "Animals"/BEESMi5match/D0GSMatch/ Result: 5 "bees" & 3 "animals" so "More bees" Carson & Abrahamson (1976) typicalatypical condition.
 S horses & 3 flies.
 L*: "Horses, Animals" S*: HORSES, FLIES LI L2 "Horses"/HORSESMatch/FLIESMismatch/ "Animals"/HORSESMatch/FLIESMismatch/ Result: 5 "horses" & 5 "animals" so "Same" Figure 4.
 Process B as a model of older children's performance in several class inclusion studies: Highlights of possible sequences.
 165 MOPs and Learning Roger C.
 Schank Yale University Computer Science Department PO Box 2158 New Haven, CT 06520 This paper is an attempt to sketch out some of what MOPs are about.
 It is taken from Schank (in press) .
 A MOP is an orderer of scenes.
 A scene is a memory structure that groups together actions with a common goal, a common time, and some other common thread.
 It provides a sequence of very general actions.
 Specific memories are stored in scenes, indexed with respect to how they differ from the general action in the scene.
 Scenes actually point MOPs do not.
 MOPs merely are particularly common in Thus, a scene consists sequence of actions, while particular realizations of scene.
 Scripts packag realizations of scenes frequently recur in a g memories can be organized This follows from the abov more than a scene (particularly instantiated MOP'S Defined to specific memories.
 point to scenes.
 Scripts stantiations of scenes.
 of a generallydefined a script groups together the generalizations in a e together particular that have been known to iven context.
 Specific in terms of scripts also.
 e, since a script is no that has been colored ) in a given way.
 Since memories are to be found in scenes, a very important part of memory organization is our ability to travel from scene to scene.
 A MOP is an organizer of scenes.
 Finding the appropriate MOP, in memory search, enables one to answer the question 'What would come next?', where the answer is another scene.
 That is, MOPs provide information about how various scenes are connected to one another.
 A MOP consists of a set of scenes directed towards the achievement of a low level goal.
 A MOP always has one major scene that is the essence or purpose of the MOP.
 There is a natural progression in terms of generality of structures that suggests itself: meta MOPs MOPs scenes scripts Meta MOPs describe ordered progressions of scenes at their most abstract levels.
 As such they provide the stuff out of which MOPs are made.
 They do not actually contain memories.
 MOPs are less general descriptions of such progressions.
 The scenes they contain actually contain specific memories.
 There are three kinds of scenes, physical, societal, and personal.
 Physical scenes represent a kind of ''snapshot" of one's surroundings at a given time.
 Memories grouped in physical scenes provide information about what happened and how things looked.
 Some MOPs refer to societal things rather than physical ones.
 MCONTRACT is a MOP that organizes scenes that are not physically bounded.
 Thus, entities such as AGREE, or DELIVER, while behaving very much like scenes in a physical MOP, have no physical instantiation.
 They can happen anywhere and can take a great many different physical forms.
 Thus, a delivery of agreed upon services that fails to come about will be indexed under the DELIVER scene in MCONTRACT.
 In this way, a failure of a department store to deliver a package that was paid for might remind one of a restaurant that required prepayment and then failed to serve the desired food.
 Such reminding can only be accounted for by a memory organization that has scenes that are not exclusively physically bounded.
 DELIVER is an example of a societal scene, that is, one that may have many possible physical realizations.
 Personal scenes are responsible for idiosyncratic behavior that is personallydefined.
 A personal scene is a scene whose common thread is a particular goal that belongs to the person whose scene it is.
 Any private plan to achieve ones own ends that is liable to repeat itself frequently is a possible personal scene.
 This division in scenes is parroted by a similar division in MOPs.
 Physical MOPs can contain scenes that seem societal in nature, but what is actually happening is that one event is being governed by two scenes.
 Thus, for example, both MCONTRACT which is a Societal MOP, and MAIRPLANE, which is physical share a PAY scene.
 But each relates to different aspects of that event.
 In other words,, ''paying" can be seen as both a physical event and as a social event.
 Different MOPs provide expectations in each case.
 These expectations will coalesce to some degree, providing uniform expectations.
 Events confirming those expectations will be remembered in terms of both of the scenes that were active.
 What is the difference between>$AIRPLANE (that is, our prior view of a script) and MAIRPLANE (that is, our current view of a MOP)? The Difference Between MOPs and Scripts A MOP is an ordered set of scenes.
 A script (1977 version) is an ordered set of scenes BUT The definition of scene is different in each case.
 For a MOP, a scene is a structure that can be shared by a great many other MOPs.
 For a script (1977 version) a scene was particular to a given script and was not accessible without using that script.
 A script (new version) is scenespecific.
 No script transcens the boundaries of a scene.
 Now, to make this specific, let us actually look at MAIRPLANE and i$AIRPLANE.
 Recall that i$AIRPLANE was more or less a list of an entire airplane trip.
 It included making the reservation, getting to the airport, checking in, riding in the plane, eating the meal and so on.
 In SAM and FRUMP these things were all stored in a complex structure, complete with optional tracks, under the namei$AIRPLANE.
 166 But, now we wish to be able to make generalizatione, get reminded across contexts and within contexts, and in general bring whatever relevant information from memory that we can find to help us in processing an input.
 To do this, we need structures that are far more general than a detailed complex list of events.
 For example, getting someplace by car, and making reservations by telephone are two scenes that were part of $AIRPLANE that could not possibly be part of MAIRPLANE.
 The reason for this is that one could easily confuse one trip in a car to visit a friend who lives near the airport, with a trip to the airport that was intended to enable one to fly someplace.
 Similarly, one could easily confuse a phone conversation maiking airline reservations with one making hotel resevervations.
 In fact they might well be the same conversation.
 The problem with our old conception of scripts was that much too much that could have been defined generally, and that is likely to be stored in a general fashion in memory, was defined specifically as a part of a particular script.
 When one takes away everything that could have been defined generally from iSAIRPLANE one is left with the things specific to'SAIRPLANE, namely getting on the plane, being seated, being served a meal and so on.
 The above entities are the scripts that we now believe in.
 That is, MAIRPLANE is a structure that, like any MOP, organizes a set of scenes.
 One of these scenes is SITTING IN THE PLANE (SITP).
 This scene has in it a number of scripts specific to that scene.
 These include i$(SITP)EATING, i$(SITP)MOVIE, and so on.
 Experiences that occurred within them, that is while those scripts were directing processing, that did not coincide with the expectations generated by that script, would be encoded as failures and indexed within that script.
 MAIRPLANE fills one strand of the meta MOPTRIP.
 It consists of the following scenes: MAIRPLANE8 scenes CHECKIN + WAITING AREA + BOARDING » SITINTHEPLANE + DEPLANE •COLLECTBAGS Each of the scenes used by MAIRPLANE is constructed as generally as possible.
 We should point out that it is people who are doing the construction of these scenes.
 One of the scenes of MAIRPLANE is something called WAITING AREA.
 Nov, it is reasonable to ask, is this the same as the scene as WAITING ROOM in MPROFtOFFICEVISIT? Clearly such answers depend upon the experiences { memory has had and the decisions about what is lik« what (its generalizations) that it has made.
 It ii perfectly plausible that a memory that had been t< a doctor's and a lawyer's office and ha( constructed a scene WAITING ROOM, night upon iti first encounter with an airport, see the waitin) area as a version of WAITING ROOM.
 And, of course it might not.
 Our point is that the possibility for sue generalizations, for interpreting a new experienc in terms of what it believes to be its mos relevant old one, must exist for a memory.
 I order to do this, scenes must be memory structure in their own right, disassociated form th structures they are used with in processing.
 Thus MOPk as we have outlined them must be the kinds o memory structures we need.
 Scripts, in the ol version of them, were too restrictive in this regard.
 This does not mean that scripts do not exist of course.
 Some of the experimental work on scripts relates to MOPs as we have now defined them and some of it relates to our new, more restricted definition of them.
 Learning Higher level learning and generalization takes place by indexing a given expectation failure in terms of the MOPs and scenes that were active at each of the three levels of analysis whenever the expectation failure occurred.
 :One key problem that a theory of memory must explain is what to do when an expectation fails.
 Consider again the Legal Seafood case (first discussed in Schank, 1980).
 After processing an episode at Legal Seafood, we would want to have detected a MOPbased expectation failure and have so indexed it.
 Why is this a MOPbased failure and how does a system know what structure to alter? The MOP MRESTAURANT indicates the order of occurrance of scenes in a sequence.
 ;One way that a HOP can fail is by having the ordering of scenes that it predicts turn out to be wrong.
 In Legal Seafood, the PAYING scene comes immediately after the ordering scene.
 Thus MRESTAURANT would be marked, at least initially, with an index after :ORDER that PAY came next in this particular instance.
 But, just simply marking MRESTAURANT is not enough.
 The main question that is generated by any expectation failure is: What alteration of the structure that generated that expectation must be made? There are three possibilities, alteration, reorganization, and the construction of a new structure.
 Consider our visitor to Burger King and HacDonald's.
 A first encounter with Burger King, for a person whose knowledge structures contain only the standard MRESTAURANT, would produce an expectation failure in the order of ORDER, SEATING, PAY, When multiple failures occur, it is a good bet that it is because the MOP being used was of little value.
 Thus, in a situation of multiple failure, a new MOP must be constructed.
 This construction is complex since it involves reworking the existing MOP to create the new one.
 This is done by altering the MOP first, and the scenes second, as follows.
 As in the Legal Seafood example, in Burger King PAY goes right after ORDER.
 In fact, we might expect a reminding here if the Legal Seafood episode came first.
 We have an additional problem with respect to MRESTAURANT in that the SEATING scene follows PAY and ORDER.
 Further there are some script expectation failures too.
 For example, i$RESTAURANTORDER is not usually done while standing.
 The first thing that must be done then is to construct a new MOP.
 To construct a new MOP, we start with the scenes of the old MOP and reorder them according to the new episode.
 This is easy in the case of what we will temporarily call MBURGER KING.
 The problem is that while the scenes may be the same, the scripts are different.
 A scene describes what takes place in general.
 And, in general, what takes place in a regular restaurant and a fastfood restaurant is the same.
 But the specifics are different.
 We do not want to use the scripts associated with MRESTAURANT therefore.
 The problem then is to construct new scripts.
 Actually, this is hardly a problem at all.
 The new script is identical to the first Burger King episode.
 The real problem is to alter the scenes.
 At this point we have a new MOP, MBURGER KING, that contains the scenes ENTER + ORDER + PAY +SEATINC with very specific scripts attached to each scene.
 Two problems remain.
 First we must encode the scripts correctly in the scene.
 Second we must generalize MBURGER KING to the MOP that is more likely to be the one of greatest use, namely MFAST FOOD.
 These two problems are related.
 167 The scene alteration problem depends, after all, on how a scene is constructed in the first place.
 Let us then, by way of example, consider the ORDER scene.
 ORDER as we have said, is a scene that is used by a great many MOPs.
 Some of these include: MRESTAURANT, MSHOPPING, MPROVIDESERVICE, MvOFFICE, MTELEPHONEBUYING, MTRAVELAGENT.
 The scene ORDER, in order to be used by this diverse set of MOPs, must be written in as general a way as possible.
 ORDER is one of those scenes that is both physical and societal.
 That is, it expresses both the generalizations that are valid when someone is physically ordering something, and those that pertain to the relationship between the participants in an ORDERing situation.
 Below, we have the physical s^ene ORDER.
 It looks a lot like a script, but without any particulars.
 Particular scripts, pointed to by ORDER, fill in the details (or color') the ORDER scene.
 Here then, is one possible view of ORDER: Participants: actor, agent Props: desired object or service; medium of MTRANSing Precondit ions: actor can MTRANS to agent agent can be assumed to have ability to get object or do service agent has willingness to get object or do service Act ions: actor establishes MTRANS linkage actor attracts attention of agent actor questions possibility of service being performed or object being delivered actor questions price of object or service actor states desire to agent agent agrees to comply agent tells actor when compliance will be complete The role of a script attached to a scene is to color the scene with the particulars of that scene.
 In other words, a script is a copy of a scene with particulars filled in.
 For a script to be used, a copy of the scene is made that alters the scene in appropriate ways, leaving intact the parts of the scene that fit perfectly.
 Similarly the actions: actor questions possibility of service being performed or object being delivered Knowledge th about ordering ordering will be piece that was unchanged from knowledge can ordering is if specific portion expectation failu stored in term expectation failu that were deriv directly copied a scene .
 at is acquired from restaurants that applies to all kinds of known to so apply because the acquired will have been copied the scene.
 The only way such apply across the board to all it relates to a nonrestaurant of the script.
 In other words, res that are scriptspecific are s of the script itself.
 But, res that were due to expectations ed from a scene piece that was re stored in terms of the original To see how the scenescript relationship looks in practice lets consider the script i$RF.
STAURANTORDER.
 When i $RESTAURANTORDER colors ORDKR it takes each line in it and either copy it directly or alters it to suit the script.
 For example, the precondition: agent has willingness to get object or do service is a line in ORDER.
 '$RESTARANTORDER colors this line by adding the inf (>rmat ion that a waitress, can be, because it is her job, assumed to be willing.
 and actor questions price of object or service are taken care of by the definition of a restaurant in the first case, and by a menu in the second.
 That is, I$RESTAURANTORDER colors ORDER by replacing an abstract line about price with information about reading a menu.
 Thus, these lines are altered in this script to reflect known information about restaurants.
 Let's take a look at how a problem in ORDER can cause memory to be changed.
 Suppose we have a person who orders in a restaurant and finds that he isn't served because he spoke in an uncouth manner.
 Initially, this person might have a memory structure that looks like this: DAGENCY ' I MFASTFOOD MRESTAURANT I MSTORE MPROVIDESERVICE I I I I I , I •I I •I ll V V ^ > ; ORDER < I I 1POSSIBILITY? I I 2PRICE? I I 3MTRANS ORDER I I •\ I I I 'SRESTAURANTORDER i$AUTOPARTS+ORDER i$DEPTORDER 1Defined by role 1copied 1FIND plan and MENU 2copied 2LOOK 2colored by MENU 3copied 3PTRANs to 3copied salesperson This diagram shows how the by three scripts.
 Those scr information in ORDER and eith coloring, or copied it direct use ORDER as one of its scenes addition, the generalization ORDER, namely DACENCY, is also This relationship is close superset relationship.
 The MOP of filler to empty slot.
 scene ORDER is used ipts have copied the er replaced it by ly.
 Three MOPs that are also shown.
 In of the goal behind connected to ORDER.
 to a hierarchical connection is one Now let's consider what happens when this person's nasty order goes unfilled in the restaurant.
 First, there is an expectation failure.
 The episode is indexed off of ISRESTAURANTORDER in slot 3.
 But, as slot 3 has been copied directly from the ORDER scene, this index is moved up to that level.
 When the same failure occurs in an auto parts store, or a fast food restaurant, or any other script that copies slot 3 directly from ORDER, a reminding occurs.
 This second instance causes a reevaluation of the expectation that has failed.
 This reevaluation causes an attempt to explain the failure.
 In this case, the explanation is that servers don't like to be ordered nastily.
 Finding such explanations is an extremely complex process.
 .
Often they are not easily discoverable.
 We may need to be told.
 We may never find out.
 But, when we do find an explanation, it causes a local fix to be made that enables the person whose experience it was to modify ORDER in slot 3 accordingly.
 This 168 allows every HOP that uses ORDER to have that fix incorporated in it without doing a thing.
 The new, altered, ORDER is simply used by any MOP that previously used the old ORDER.
 In other words, this hypothetical person should now know to ask his wife to cook him things in a polite way and so on.
 Now let's consider the Burger King example again.
 The problem in constructing HBURGER KING is to take each scene that that MOP uses and treat each action that occurs within it in terms of its deviation from the baseline scene.
 Thus, i$BURGERKINGORDER is built by noting how the actions observed in the first experience with Burger King differ from the ORDER scene.
 The problem is, of course, that we want this MOP to be MFAST FOOD.
 To get this MOP to be built, it is necessary to index MBURGER KING in terms of MRESTAURANT.
 The reason for this is as follows: Consider a patron entering MacDonalds.
 We want this patron to get reminded of Burger King.
 To put this another way, we want the patron to know to use MBURGERKING and not MRESTAURANT.
 How can this be accomplished? One way is to index MRESTAURANT at the point of its failed expectation relevant to Burger King, in this case noting that the scene ordering was different in a particular way.
 Thus, MRESTAURANT must now have in it a marker recalling the past expectation failure and directing the processor where to go for help in further processing.
 After this rerouting of processing has occurred a few times in the same way, the reminding ceases to occur.
 At that point MBURGER KING has been transformed into a MOP with entry conditions of its own, that is, one that can be called in for use without even seeing it as a type of restaurant.
 To put this more generally, a new MOP is grown at the point where its conditions for use have been detected so that it can be called up independently from the HOP in which it originated as an expectation failure.
 Thus, after a few trials, MRESTAURANT and HFAST FOOD are independent MOPs.
 In general then, expectation failures that are MOPbased, will initially just produce markers valuable for reminding.
 However, if the failure is radical enough, a new HOP must be constructed immediately.
 REFERENCES Schank, R.
 C.
 (1980) Language and Memory.
 COGNITIVE SCIENCE.
 Vol A no.
 3, 2A3284.
 Schank, R.
 C.
 (In Press) DYNAMIC MEMORY: A Theory pf Learning in Computers and People.
 169 Retrieving General and Specific Information from Stored Knowledge of Specifics James L.
 McClelland University of California, San Diego We often attribute the human ability to generallEe from past experience to the use of stored representations (schemas, prototypes, etc.
) In which generalizations are explicitly represented.
 This view is very appealing, but it raises two problems.
 First, there needs to be some mechanism for arriving at generalizations that are not stored explicitly, since it Is unlikely that memory contains explicit representations that anticipate all of the possible generalizations we might ever wish to make.
 Second, we must explain how generalizations which are stored explicitly were obtained in the first place.
 A mechanism that could Induce generalizations from stored representations of specific objects or events could solve both these problems at once.
 It would explain how we could generalize when no explicit generalization is stored, and it would also suggest how we might have induced those generalizations which are stored.
 Such a mechanism would also force us to consider whether we really store generalizations explicitly at all.
 If we can generate generalizations from stored representations of specific objects when we need to, explicit representation of these generalizations might turn out to be unnecessary.
 Medln and Shaffer (1978) have suggested a first step toward the kind of mechanism I have in mind.
 Their model explains how we can assign a category label to a new object, based only on stored knowledge of the properties of previously encountered objects and the category labels that have been assigned to them.
 Their ideas can be extended to suggest how we may be able to do such things as answer questions about the general characteristics of classes of objects we have experienced before, and to fill In plausible default values for unspecified attributes of new exemplars.
 The basic Idea is that representations of previouslyexperienced exemplars stored In memory are activated via a spreading activation mechanism.
 Activated exemplars themselves activate representations of their properties.
 Mutually exclusive property values compete so that properties which are supported by a large subset of the active instances of the category are reinforced and become strongly active while those which are not are suppressed.
 Such a mechanism has recently been proposed by Glushko (1979) to account for our ability to construct apparently ruleguided pronunciations of nonwords (e.
g.
, MAVE) without actually having any rules, and has been used by Ruraelhart and me (McClelland and Rumelhart, In press; Rumelhart and McClelland, in press) to account for facilitation of perception of letters in words and nonwords.
 In both of these applications, the activation/competition mechanism Is used to generate apparently rulegoverned performance from stored knowledge of specific words.
 I will illustrate the mechanism I am proposing by showing how it can be used to generalize from stored representations of specific objects.
 The representations of the objects are highly simplified, and are not sufficient to capture the varieties of struct\ire of real objects.
 It Is not my intention to advocate the representation.
 Rather, I use It to explicate the generalization mechanism, which Is the main focus of Interest here.
 We shall see that, even with a simplified representational system, the activation and competition mechanism can construct the general properties of classes of objects from stored knowledge of exemplars.
 It can also generalize along an Indefinite number of different lines, retrieve the specific characteristics of particular exemplars, and fill In plausible default values for missing properties.
 Table 1 The Jets and The Sharks Name Art Al Sam Clyde Mike Jim Greg John Doug Lance George Pete Fred Gene Ralph Phil Ike Nick Don Ned Karl Ken Earl Rick 01 Neal Dave Gang Jets Jets Jets Jets Jets Jets Jets Jets Jets Jets Jets Jets Jets Jets Jets Sharks Sharks Sharks Sharks Sharks Sharks Sharks Sharks Sharks Sharks Sharks Sharks Age 40's 308 20's 40's 308 20's 20's 208 308 208 208 20's 20's 20's 30's 30's 30's 30's 30's 30's 40's 20's 40's 30's 30's 30's 30's Edu J.
H.
 J.
H.
 COL.
 J.
H.
 J.
H.
 J.
H.
 H.
S.
 J.
H.
 H.
S.
 J.
H.
 J.
H.
 H.
S.
 H.
S.
 COL.
 J.
H.
 COL.
 J.
H.
 H.
S.
 COL.
 COL.
 H.
S.
 H.
S.
 H.
S.
 H.
S.
 COL.
 H.
S.
 H.
S.
 Mar sing.
 mar.
 sing.
 sing.
 sing.
 dlv.
 mar.
 mar.
 sing.
 mar.
 dlv.
 sing.
 sing.
 sing.
 sing.
 mar.
 sing.
 sing.
 mar.
 mar.
 mar.
 sing.
 mar.
 dlv.
 mar.
 sing.
 dlv.
 Occupation pusher burglar bookie bookie bookie burglar pusher burglar bookie burglar burglar bookie pusher pusher pusher pusher bookie pusher burglar bookie bookie burglar burglar burglar pusher bookie pusher I will Illustrate the features of the model by considering how It can be used to retrieve Information about the members of two gangs called the Jets and the Sharks.
 Characteristics of hypothetical members of these two gangs are listed in the Table 1.
 The model's knowledge of these individuals Is captured in a node network.
 Each node is a simple processing device which accumulates excitatory and inhibitory inputs from other nodes continuously and adjusts Its (realvalued) output to other nodes continuously in response, much as a neuron adjusts Its rate of firing in response to a varying pattern of excitatory and inhibitory Inputs.
 The model has a node for each of the individuals it knows and a node for each of the properties or attributes these individuals may have.
 The former are called instance nodes and the latter are called property nodes.
 There Is a property node for each Individual's name, one for each gang, one for each age range, one for each educational level, and so on.
 Property nodes are arranged into groups or cohorts of mutually exclusive values.
 The instance nodes are also treated as a cohort of mutually exclusive nodes.
 In the following Figure, the Instance nodes have been placed in the center with the property nodes all around.
 Nodes within a cohort (bounded region) are mutually inhibitory.
 The system's knowledge of an individual consists simply of an Instance node and a set of bldlrectlonal excitatory links between it and the nodes for the properties that individual is known to have.
 For example, the system's representation of Lance is an Instance node with mutual excitatory connections to the name node "Lance", the gang membership node "Jet", the age node "20'k", the education node "Junior High", the marital status node '"married", and the occupation node "burglar".
 170 Ilunlt Hnnklr Pv<hti e Figure 1.
 The representation of several of the Individuals listed In Table 1.
 Filling In Properties In Response to a Probe The system Is queried by presenting It with a probe.
 For example, to find out about the properties of the Jets we can probe the system by activating the property node "Member of Jets".
 A probe might be a name or any other single property, or it may consist of a list of properties.
 Before a probe is presented, each node Is assumed to be at rest, with an activation value below 0.
 Probe presentation causes an excitatory input to be applied to each node specified in the probe.
 This excitatory input is allowed to stay on, and as time passes it drives the activations of the specified property nodes above 0, into what is called the active range.
 Active nodes send excitatory signals to the instance nodes they are linked to and send inhibitory signals to the other nodes in the same cohort.
 These signals are graded, and their strength is proportional to the source node's activation.
 As processing continues, some of the instance nodes become active.
 They then begin to excite the property nodes they are connected to, and to inhibit all the other instance nodes.
 Eventually, property nodes not present in the probe may become activated.
 The excitation and inhibition processes are allowed to go to equilibrium.
 At this point, the system has generally activated property nodes for properties not specified in the probe.
 These activations are the system's response to the probe.
 If all of the active instance nodes "agree" on a property, the node for that property will tend to be strongly activated.
 On the other hand, if they all specify different values within the same cohort, many values will become partially activated and they will all tend to cancel each other out.
 In any case, what is filled In can then be used as a basis for overt response to the probe.
 For example, a statement of the typical age of the members of the Jets could be based on the resulting pattern of activation over the age nodes.
 I will go through some examples of what the system fills in In response to various probes after giving a few more details of the working of the model.
 Quantitative Details The net input to node 1 at time t Is given by: tnputj(t)  pj(t) + EZ;e,j(t)  lElij(t).
 p (t) stands for the probe Input to node 1.
 It is set to +.
2 If the probe drives node 1 and to 0 otherwise.
 The s,.
(C) are the activations of the active cxcitors of nofft 1 and the 1, (t) are the activations of the active Inhibitors of rrode 1.
 The constants E and I are simply weights w!i1ch modulate the excitatory and Inhibitory effects of the input.
 Their values (.
05 and .
03) are the same for all nodes except as noted below.
 The effect of the net Input to node I la modulated by the current activation (a,(t)).
 If the net Input Is excitatory (I.
e.
, greater tnan or equal to 0) then the effect Is effectj(t)  (Maj(t))lnput^(t) If the net Input is inhibitory (i.
e.
, less than 0) then the effect is effectj(t) (aj(t)m)inputj(t) Here M stands for the maximum possible activation of the node and m stands fo.
r the minimum.
 This formulation ensures that the activation of each node stays between the maximum and minimum values, which are set to 1.
0 and .
2 respectively.
 There is a tendency for the activation of each node to decay at some rate D back to its resting value R.
 This tendency is subtracted from the effect of the net input to the node to determine the rate of its activation: d(a^(t))/dt  effect^(t)  D(aj(t)R) .
 The values of D and R are .
05 and .
1.
 Simulation The behavior of the system described above Is simulated on a digital computer by using discrete rather than continuous time.
 One every tick of the discrete clock, the activations of each node are adjusted to reflect the effects of the activations of other nodes at the end of the previous tick.
 The time slices are kept thin by using small values for E, I, and D, so that the approximation to a continuous system is quite close.
 Examples of the Model's Behavior Let us examine the system's response to the probe "Member of the Jets".
 Presentation of the probe causes the "Jet" node to become active, and this in turn sends activation to the instance nodes of all of the members of the Jets.
 As they become active they send excitation to the nodes for their properties.
 These nodes in turn reinforce the activations of those jets with active properties.
 After about 200 cycles the pattern of activation over the property nodes has stabilized at the following values: Name: Gang: Age: Ed: Mar: Dec: — Jets 20's J.
H.
 Sing.
 Pusher .
869 .
663 .
663 .
663 .
334 Bookie .
33A Burglar .
334 Activations for Instance nodes are omitted to save space.
 All property nodes not mentioned are below zero activation.
 Based on these activations the model could generate a list of its conception of the typical properties of the Jets.
 In the case where only one possibility Is active, the system would simply report that value.
 Where multiple possibilities are active.
 It could either list the set of possibilities or make a probabilistic choice from among the alternatives.
 in this case the active age, education, and marital status properties are the ones which are typical of the Jets.
 Though no Jet has all three of these properties, 9 out of 15 of the Jets arc In their 20's, 9 have only Junior High educations, and 9 are single.
 The occupations are divided evenly among the three possibilities.
 Thus, the model tends to activate the node on each dimension which is most typical of the members of the gang, even though It has never encountered a single Instance with all of these properties, and has no explicit representation that the Jets tend to have these properties.
 171 An Interesting feature of the model Is that It can retrieve the typical properties of any subset of individuals matching an arbitrary conjunction of specifiable properties.
 For example, we can probe with the properties "Age in 20'8" and "Junior High Education".
 Four individuals have these two properties.
 All of them are Jets and Burglars by trade.
 Two of them are married and two divorced.
 The response of the system reflects these facts: Name: Gang: Age: Ed: Mar: Occ: Lance Jim Jets 20's J.
H.
 Mar.
 Burglar .
127 .
094 .
732 .
855 .
862 .
589 .
721 John George Dlv.
 .
127 .
09A .
389 In this case the instance nodes for the four individuals matching the probe become strongly enough activated to drive the activations of the corresponding name nodes above threshold.
 Lance and John get more active than Jim and George because the Instance node for Al, a married individual who is very similar to Lance et al.
, becomes slightly activated, thereby boosting the activation of the "married" node and causing Lance and John to gain a slight edge.
 The model can also be used to retrieve the properties of a particular individual.
 In so doing.
 It exhibits the tendency to fill In "default" values for unknown properties of an Instance.
 To Illustrate this, we can delete the link between the Instance node for Lance and the "burglar" node and then see what happens when we present the name "Lance" as a probe.
 The Lance name node becomes active and excites the corresponding instance node.
 This excites the nodes for the known properties of Lance.
 These then excite the nodes for other individuals who share these properties.
 Finally, they In turn excite the nodes for properties that they share.
 When the pattern of activity finally stabilizes (in about 400 cycles) the model has filled in an occupation for Lance.
 Name: Gang: Age: Ed: Mar: Occ: Lance Jets 20's J.
H.
 Mar.
 Burglar .
799 .
710 .
667 .
704 .
552 .
641 Dlv.
 .
347 In summary, the model 1 have described is capable of generalizing along a number of different lines about the shared properties of specified subsets of familiar objects.
 It can also retrieve what it knows about specific instances, and, if desired, fill In plausible default values for unknown properties of the retrieved individuals.
 It can Induce generalizations as It needs them across novel partitions of the knowledge base.
 Since these are many of the behaviors which have led workers In various fields of cognitive science to assume we explicitlv store generalizations, the model raises the possibility that this assumption, however plausible, may not necessarily be true In all cases.
 There are many more steps to be taken, of course.
 For one thing, the model needs a representational system which can capture more highly structured knowledge.
 How the model can be extended in this way while preserving its interesting properties Is currently being explored.
 Acknowledgements The work reported here was supported by NSF Grant BNS7924062.
 I would like to thank Steve Draper.
 George Handler, and Don Norman for very useful comments.
 References Glushko, R.
 J.
 The Organization and activation of orthographic knowledge In reading words aloud.
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance.
 1979, 5, 674691.
 McClelland, J.
 L.
, & Rumelhart, D.
 E.
 An interactive activation model of the effect of context in perception, part 1.
 Chip Report 91, Center for Human Information Processing, University of California, San Diego.
 La Jolla, California, 1980.
 Medln, D.
 L.
 & Shaffer, M.
 M.
 Context theory of classification learning.
 Psychological Review, 1978, 85, 207235.
 Rumelhart, D.
 E.
, & McClelland, J.
 L.
 An interactive activation model of the effect of context In perception, part II.
 Chip Report 95, Center for Human Information Processing, University of California, San Diego.
 La Jolla, California, 1980.
 The value filled in is shared by the other individuals who are most similar to Lance (namely John, Jim and George).
 At equilibrium the different marital situations of these Individuals are also reflected in the pattern of activation.
 The model has blended Its representation of Lance with its representation of other very similar instances.
 This kind of blending can be a good or a bad thing, of course.
 It is sometimes Important to know what we really know about something rather than what we might plausibly assume based on our knowledge of similar things.
 Fortunately, a single parameter of the model — the strength of mutual competition among Instances — determines whether the model will tend to fill In values from partial activations of related Instances.
 If active Instances inhibit each other strongly, then the most strongly activated instance will tend to dominate the pattern of activation and keep other Instances from "contaminating" the information retrieved.
 In the Lance example, if the strength of Instancetoinstance inhibition Is Increased from .
03 to .
05, the Instance node for Lance dominates the Instance nodes and the others are kept from getting active so they cannot activate the missing occupation or the competing marital status.
 Thus, the model can either retrieve what is actually known about an lnst;ince or It ran fill in missing properties from the common properties of similar instances.
 172 CAN IF UE FORMALLY r^PREGKtnED? D.
 S.
 Broc! Any attempt to arrive at a formal soinaiitics for natural lauguago munt at least provide; a mapping of the function word into the chosen formal representation.
 One of the furiction words that has given considerable problems to logicians is if.
 Even today there is a del:).
Tte concerning whether or not i/' is equivaicnt to material implication, 3 , in the propositional logic; see for instance the journal Analycis.
 It has long been recognised tlia.
t equating i f with => loads to difficulties, i will look at two proposals to cope with this within the confines of traditional projj'OL.
itional logic: one is an older logician's ajjjjroach, Reic)icnbach's (IQ'l?) connective interpretation; the other is a recent proposal for a 'natural' logic put forward by the psycliologist Eraine (1978).
 As neither is satisfactory I will next look at two approfMches involving i.
iod̂ l logic: the wo]l known 'strict implication' of Lewis and Langford (1932) and an iraj>rovement due to Stalnakcr (1968), both of which are also unsatisfactory.
 This will bring ma to a consideration of the 'possible v/orlds' logic vhlch appears to be particularly suitable for conditional propositions.
 Regrettably, it once again terns out t)iat a second jiroposal by Stnlnakor (1975) , namely tliat if p,q may reason.
ibly be inferred from p or q and viceversa, is not proven.
 At this point one is tempted to abandon thi; attempt to capture the natural use of i f in a formalism and to .
ujree with Crico's highly convincing notion that the difference between if and material implication can be accounted for by certciin conversational implicatures to v;hicli all discourse is bound.
 Hov;ever, I find that a ratJier siinple interpretation of if in the first order predicate calculu^, supplcnientGd v.
'ith a convention to differcritiate ar;:,erted from presupposed projiositions, appeals to meet all the standard objections.
 'Jlie well known prol:.
loms tl^at arise by equating if p,q with p '̂  q are: a.
 AffirmnUon thvoujh denial of the ante> odcn is jjC'rmlssrible for 3, i.
e.
 p*p::>q, but not for if, e.
g.
 A: Tf Cod exist', v.
c are frre to do v'l>;'.
t v;o w.
iiit.
 D: llo'.
; (Xo you coiijo to tlia' conclusioi^? A: r.
y kiiov.
'ing il.
nt; Cioo do.
ti't cxi^'.
 h.
 Afp'j'r'Upu thy.
ri j': crrrtinn o f the C' II.
 ''••)•.
.
 i .
•; T , : .
 • f • :.
; n, i .
 f ,,; II I ii'.
 ijd'.
i, .
1, •'•J.
' .
:k.
m.
o ,.
 ji J •'••'riot 1 ng lii \ n'.
' .
A.
i' '.
i,:.
.
.
 B: How do you know? A: Because there are always street riots here at this time of year.
 c.
 Denying material implication permits only one true state, i.
e.
 ~[.
p'^q) *p i,q, but denying a conditional may be something else, e.
g.
 A: It's not so that if God exists v/e are free to do what v;e want.
 B: Are you claiming that God exists and we aren't free to do what we want? Similar problems arise when ov is equated with V, a situation which led Reichenbaoh (19'17) to propose that a 'connective' interpretation be given to v in ovdc;r to make it equivr;lcnt to or.
 This interpretation requires that all possibilities must remain open.
 Applying this idea to 3 would require that it must not be possible to do away witli any of tlie three residual statements for the truth of p'^q, i.
e.
 (pfiq) .
 Kpf^q) and (p&q) , in order for n to be equated with if.
 Now both denying the antecedent, p , and asserting the consequent, q, rule out two of these three and so no i f statement may be used.
 Moreover, denying an i f p,q may be denying that all three residual styteinents are open.
 So Reiclionbach's proposal copes with the Oiree well knov/n problems.
 However, it is open to criticism as it fails to distinguish the relative importance of the three residual statements for an if statement: d.
 Homogeneity: pkq > p=><7 but not if p,q as seen in an example of Conditional Perfection (Geis & Zwicky, 1971) A: If you mow the lawn, I'll give you 5 dollars.
 B: (Returning after a minute) May I have the 5 dollars now? A: But you can't have mowed tlie lav;n already.
' B: I haven't, but you said tlierc was a possibility of my getting the 5 dollars anyway (p and 17) .
 It is not only logicians who have tried to adapt propositional logic so that o can be equated with if, )3sychologi sts also are interested.
 For example lot us consider a recent attempt by JJraine (1970) to set up a 'natiir.
il' logic b.
i'od on IC 'natuial sc:lieiii.
jta' which he claims ,iri.
 available for reasoning.
 These include for example modus ponoir, but not modn.
 tollfi,, v.
'liich is tl;:i"; nr.
t availal^]: as > : '' ' • • • .
 •' ' ! i \.
 .
 • .
,;i;; III I Ml oi:l y follo'.
/:: l)c,,i sev'0);il stci>:s.
 B) aino ecjUiitcs if 173 with /, which is equivalent to an inference in )iis system.
 Hut it can be shown t.
Tiat / suffers from all three of the traditional problems of 3, sec Figure 1.
 Note in particular the ease witli which the trutli of the consequent q, can be used to derive p/q.
 1 believe that we should giiits' attempts to adapt proposititmal logic so tliat if can be equated with 3 that this is not the way to go.
 rifum 1 > iha' hr̂iin̂'e x̂̂i.
m of Ĥturul ;.
.
•.
;•• fîffct ftvm thn rivi.
i( (lotnl jivfrftnt II .
>' ton rroK p fri .
» 1 i.
i 4.
S C 4.
^,7 *t,10 10.
1 r 1.
17 l.
y Ntt N •.
 NIC Ml* Nl? N 0 III''Nifl Ml'' Ilvr, y p/r <!>«'; 1 P r(p«ql rh) <i (piF(p*.
iii/.
i p/q F(p»4)/lp/qJ i.
/(p/<:i AffirnAtlon f x* .
.
 l\l: Kl; M: ft'.
 PG: fto« I ).
' J.
4 4,̂  by H 7 Nir.
 Nie '•' q qruvo i»q q »r»qi/q q p/q l/tp/q) in1.
1,1 to ff Cl C3 Cl C4 Ci C« C7 C* C9 CIO Cll cl? CIJ Iron 1,1 ?,4 ', 7 7,9 10 >.
)• t.
l? pt q b/ NI6 tnc M 1 M f Nib AM N 1 N 7 N 1 Viwu F(p/q) q p/q (r/q)»r(p/<,) q/((p/q)<r(,.
/ q p I'/q (p/qlir(p/q) p/'(p/q>iF'(p/ P rAq 1(p/ql/(r*ql wl lo «?0 Aro Braln«*B n«tui*l «c>im«u, .
vml oI irtilch Bra obvlouni HI6 Is 'AKsunlnf'.
 Attempts to equate if with a modal operator have also met with difficulties.
 For instance Uie well known proposal that if might be equivalent to strict implication put forward by Lewis and Langford (1932) partially overcomes all four of the problems of material implication.
 Strict iinplicfition is defined as asserting the impossibility of p&<7, i.
e.
 0 (p̂  Strict implication is thus a stronger concept than material implication; tlie latter can be deduced from the former, ilowever, it still suffers from stronger versions of the two problems of affirmation as ~0j)» ~0 (pc/) and 07 • ~<>q>~^{pq) but it is not so tli.
it from eitlier the impossibility of the antecedent or from the necessity of the consequent that a conditional if statement m̂ ay be deduced, as can be seen by appropriately modifying t)ie exan)ples given for the affirmation problems above.
 At one point Stalnakrir (1968) attemptci to improve on the Lewis and Langford proposal bv (î iMtinq if J',a \;it.
h p"̂ '7; his foj,inr, >, ciitailid iiiĉLCj'j aJ iii:piic.
:'t:njii and is luI ailed by strict implication, i.
e.
 p>q*p^q and ~0 (pq)* a {p =) q)*p>q.
 Unfortunately this leaves it open to the same criticism as strict implication, for instance the impossibility of the antecedent is sufficient for the corner, i.
e.
 ~^p» • (p r> qr) » p>q.
 Modal logic has not offered us a formal representation of ij , although it has come closer than simple prepositional logic.
 It is then with high expectations tliat v/e turn to the logic of 'possible worlds' which seems designed to cope with conditionals.
 In brief this postulates a universe of possible worlds arranged in an ordered series of sets such that each set contains all the worlds of the previous sot and some more worlds besides.
 The initial set contains one world, which is usually interpreted as our world as it is.
 Worlds added in going from one set, K, to the next set, K+1, are further removed from our world than all worlds in set K.
 These sets are the contexts in which sentences are interpreted.
 For a conditional sentence the appropriate context in the first set which contains a world in wliich the proposition underlying the antecedent is true.
 A nice consequence of this is that if is no longer a transitive relcition as can be seen by examining Figure 2, Even 'if B goes to the party, A will go' and 'if C goes, B will go' it does not follow tliat 'if C goes, A will go'; A may well want to go to meet B but not in the unlikely circumstances of C's going as well.
 Figure 2 Possible iioi'lds representation of if, p, q is not trajisitive goiny o C going B going .
'•;'.
.
[ pnro; 'If n's goiTKT 10 vhr.
 p"ty, A'p .
•.
linq' Uur not: 'If <"': iioiin '.
n tli.
 |>''y, ;.
's coitii' Figure 3 A formal vei'cion of Stalr^kor's proof To Proove: 'P or Q therefore if P, Q' is a reasonable inference Proof: Suppose 'P or Q' is appropriate in K.
 S2: Suppose 'P or Q' in accepted in K.
 So PRQ is appropriate in K.
 So P is appronritTi,'? in K.
 If X is aopropri.
Tto und V is accepted in K, 'if X, Y' is accepted in K.
 So "•;' P, then r •^;' 0' is accepted in K.
 So 'if I', then Q' is acccipted in K.
 So 'P or Q therefcvc! :;' P, Q' is a reasonable inCrrrncB.
 S3: S4: rS: Eli: all SO: 174 It is v/ithin this formalism that Stalnakcr (1975) set out to sliov; that, although if p,q laay not be truth functionally equivalent to p or q the one is a reasonable inference from the other and viceversa.
 A reasonable inference occurs when for all contexts, K, in which the premise is appropriate and accexiUcible the conclusion is also.
 A proposition, P, is appropriate in K if there exists at least one world in K in which P holds; P is acceptable if it holds in all worlds in K.
 A formal version of Stalnaker's proof that '•>•? or Q therefore if P,Q' is a reasonable inference is reproduced in Figure 3.
 Unfortunately it is flawed as it assumes what it is setting out to prove, namely that if P,Q is equivalent to P:3Q in step 5.
 The result is not surprising as even the 'impossible worlds' formalism of if accepts any appro^Driate conditional in which the consequent is necessarily true, the second of the traditional problems of affirmation.
 Those of you who never believed in the logical basis of natural language v;ill by now be thinking 'I told you i;o' and those convinced in the formal program will be busy finding a now formalism.
 Perhaps we should follow a middle road, for example the path marked out by Grice (1967) in his William James lectures.
 He virtually divided the problem into two parts: retain a simple formal rcprescnration for natural language connectives, including if, and account for deviations between the formalism and the normal usage by postulating a set of Indirect Conditions, TC.
 'Hion if = => + IC.
 The IC's are t.
lic c.
itic.
'l); i.
'lo p.
.
i'!• rif i i)̂ ' 1:1'?i;ii:ir; of if, c.
q.
 part of the IC is that t)ie speaker door.
n't know the truth values of either the antecedent nor the consequent but those are cancellable as in I knov; where Smith is and what ho is doing; all I'll say is that if he's in London he's attending the meeting.
 Although they are cancellable they are not detachable, i.
e.
 it isn't possioie uo find another formulation which is equivalent to iflC, e.
g.
 both Eitlier SmitJi isn't in London or he's attending the meeting.
 It isn't the case that Smith's in London and not attending the meeting.
 contain the same IC.
 Suc)i IC's Grice called Conversational Implicatures, CI's, which )iold for conversation in general not only for if.
 His first CI is the maxim of quantity: a speaker does not say less tlian lie knows.
 Thus a speaker will not use if p,q when he knov/s p or q for certain, which avoids the two affirmation problems.
 Hi.
; third CI is.
 more specific: if P,q has an implicatiire 'sujjpocing p, tlien q' .
 This CI is a];.
o present with p or q.
 It enables tlie problems of denial and homogeneity to bo avoided.
 Ilov.
ever, it doesn't have the generality that one v;ould like from a CI.
 Would it be t.
oo uncharitiJ.
ile to say that it ducks the issxie? Witli a certain trepidation I would like to propose a formalism for if p,q in the first Older predicate calculus Fl: Vw(P(w) z>Q(w)) f.
 [3(x,y) (P(x)&~Q(y))] in which the proposition P is the proposition derived from p in the context K, and P(w) is true if P is the case in world w.
 The universal, V, and existential, 3, operators operate over all worlds in the context set K, following the 'possible worlds' formalism.
 The necessity for differentiating p and P is not only that the proposition underlying a sentence depends on tlie context in which that sentence is interi:)reted, but also because the protasis and apodosis of a conditional arc not ncces'^arily equivalent to sentences, they sometimes cannot stand alone, e.
g.
 If anyone has a malignant cancer of the backbone, they'll be dead within 6 months.
 If Alexander was afraid, I didn't notice it.
 As Ryle (1950) pointed out if sentences contain statement indents, not statements.
 They can be used for making inferences, but are not in themselves inferences.
 Tliis f oniitil i SI1 avoic:; the three t.
raJitional pruljleii.
o oi ijL.
t t.
i.
ii.
j ij' >.
 itli '>.
 Lat Iv be our v/orld.
 Then neither P(W) nor Q(VJ) is sufficient to affirm if p,q unless W is the only world in K.
 Nor can it be confirmed by p nor by q as these two extremes are ruled out by the 'presupposition' of if, given in Fl between square brackets.
 The problem of denial is also avoided, as denvinq if denies the assertion Vw(P(w)3Q(w)) which is equivalent to 3w(P(w) & ~Q(w)), but the world that satisfies this denial is not necessarily our world.
 However, this formalism fails to avoid the homogeneity problem: there is no difference between a world for which PQ is true and one for which PQ is true.
 Tliis problem can be avoided if we are jiropared to use strict implication rather than material implication.
 We then define if p,q to be represented by F2: Vw(P(w)»Q(w)) & [3(x,y) (P(x) & ~Q(y))] in which the same conventions hold as Jibove, and » is strict implication.
 Specifically strict implication has a known truth value only when the antecedent is true.
 Tliys P»Q is true for PQ and false for PQ, which avoids the homogeneity problem.
 It remains to be seen if there are other problems which this formalism is not capable of handling.
 At first glance this formulation for if seems to cope with problems that arise for 'other' interpretations of if than the standard.
 Most notorious of these is the countorfactual in VJhich the premise is claimed to be false of the actual v;orld, but from a false proposition anytliing follows! As Lewis (1973) has shovm the 'possible worlds' approach,which I have here adapted, can cope with counterfactuals.
 There is no claim in F2 that P(W) is false (or true), 175 e.
g.
 If Paul had stuck to his plan, he'd (still) have been famous.
 (Examples are adapted fro.
n the Brown corpus of American English, Kucera and Francis, 1967).
 K2 also copes with factuals in which both P(VJ) and Q(VJ) hold, e.
g.
 If Williclm Reich in the Moses who has led them out of the Egypt of sexual slavery, Dylan Thomas is the poot who o'fors them the Dionysian dealcctic of justification for their indulgence in liquor.
 As P(W) is true Q(W) must hold.
 But contrary to the possible worlds formulation, the context, K, mu;,t not be confined to VJ as tljen 3v;(~Q(w)).
 Nor is there any problem with Austin's (1961) stipulatjve use of if, e.
g.
 Ti.
ric nrc foM' bj <:cu''.
 t.
s on the 1:.
<.
"ib] o, if you v/ani.
 souir.
 as again the truth statvis of Q(VJ) is not necessarily open but may be true.
 And 1 think it will handle cases of doubtful presupposition as in It made him conspicuous to the enemy, if it was tlie enemy.
 Here the interpjretation of q is problematic ,,,, ̂  ̂  ~ „ T̂  if.
 i.
,,„ !_,.
*_ ̂  A '̂  —'̂  r^l .
 .
 „ ^ _ ^A,,,.
.
;,, 4implication this does not matter.
 I do not claim that the use of r2 for if can decide which of these 'interpretations' is actually the case.
 Rather tliat decision sliould not rest upon if, but must be made using other aspects of the sentence, e.
g.
 what the listener knows that tlio spealcer knows.
 This is particularly the case for tlie use of if within the scope of performative verb, e.
g.
 He promised vengcnco on V.
Ii.
 if ever the chance camf' his way.
 Wliat I do say is that F2 peyinits these different interpretations, with the exception of the performative.
 FEFERENCES AUSTIN, J.
L.
 (1961) Ifs and cans.
 In J.
O.
 Urmson and G.
J.
 Warnock, eds.
, Philosophical papers of J.
L.
 Austin.
 London; Oxford University Press.
 BRAINE, M.
D.
S.
 (1979) On the relation between the natural logic of reasoning and standard logic.
 Psychological Review, 85, 121.
 GEISS, M.
L.
 and ZWICKY, A.
M.
 (1971) On invited inferences.
 Linguistic Inquiry, 2, 561566.
 GRICE, II.
P.
 (1967) Williajn James Lecturers, Harvard University.
 Published in part as "Logic and conversation", P.
 Cole and J.
L.
 Morgan, eds.
, Syntax and Semantics, Vol.
 3: Speech Acts.
 New York; seminar Press, 1975, 4150.
 KUCERA, H.
 and FRANCIS, W.
 N.
 (1967) Computational analysis of presentday American English.
 Providence; Brown University Press.
 LEWIS, C.
I.
 and LANGFORD, C.
H.
 (1932 and 1959) Symbolic Logic.
 2nd ed.
 New York; Dover.
 LEWIS, D.
K.
 (1973) Cowxterfactuals.
 Cambridge, Mass.
; Harvard University Press.
 REICHENBACH, H.
 (1947) Elements of symbolic Logic.
 London; Macmillan.
 RYLE, G.
 (1950) 'If, 'so' and 'becau.
3e'.
 In M.
 Black, ed.
.
 Philosophical analysis.
 New York; Cornell University Press.
 STALNAKl^R, R.
C.
 (1968) A theory of conditionals.
 In: N.
 Rescher, ed.
 Studies in logical Theory.
 Oxford; Blackwell.
 Reprinted in E.
 Sosa, ed.
, Causation and countt'.
rfactuals.
 Oxford University Press, 1975.
 STALNAKI^R, R.
C.
 (1975) Indicative conditionals.
 Philosophia, 5, 269286.
 176 T" SEh .
Aî D.
 NOT TO SEt, TiiAT IS THE QUESTION E.
 Andrcevs|.
y , A.
 Andreewsky G.
 Deloche and D.
 Uourcler .
 I.
<SERM U 84, Hopltal de la Salpetrlere, 47, Bd de I'hopital.
 75014, PARISFRA.
NCE.
 ^LIMSIalRS, Orsay FRANCE \rA 430 CNRSFRANCE.
 Both psychological and computational theories of the lexicon usually consist of the specifications of the semantic relations between words.
 The present paper proposes an alternative, and simpler lexicon which does not include the particular meanings for each item in It.
 This lexicon consists instead of pointers to a general knowledge database, on the basis of which the meanings of words are to be computed.
 World knowledge is indeed required to understand properly any word.
 This is demonstrated by examples like the following : in "a green salad" vs.
"a green cadaver", the color of "green" is not the same! But the requirement may be more obvious for a lexical ambiguity.
 For instance, to account for the meanings of the verb "study" in : "Francois studies english" vs.
 "Chomsky studies english", one cannot help but take into account much knowledge about how english is not tlie french people ^as Francois refers toi mother tongue, on one hand, and, on the other hand, about Chomsky's scientific activity.
 The psychological meaning of words does indeed depends on world knowledge : it is more likely to result from some processing (taking this stored knowledge into account) than to be Just retrieved out of any structure.
 In this paper, we will, first, give a computational model for the resolution of lexical ambiguity; it is grounded on an abstract "lexicon", with pointers to the knowledge database.
 We will then present psychoUnguistic data which call for such a preprocessing as the above abstract lexicon may provide.
 RESOLUTION OF POLYSEMIES.
 AN A.
I.
 APPROACH.
 Given a (french) sentence, including a lexical ambiguity, m, we want to disambiguate m.
 The present resolution of this problem is based on an automatic information retrieval system, in natural language, so called "SPIRIT" (A.
 Andreewsky et al, 1980)whlch is currently use in Paris, with various database.
 The "world knowledge" of SPIRIT is its stored documents (the french texts D,, D,.
.
.
 D ).
 The "lexicon" of SPIRIT is very poo? : it contains mainly morphological and syntactical properties of words.
 SPIRIT computes the "distances" d.
, between any given french sentence s (that is, any request to the system) and its n stored documents; these distances d.
 enable the system to answer to £ , by means of an hierarchically arranged list of numbers : A^ = (i , i^, .
.
.
 i^) I.
e.
 a set of weighted numbers pointing to the documents Di,, Dl^, .
.
.
.
 Dl , answering the best to the request s.
 SPIRIT includes a syntactical disarablguator: For instance, a word such as "can" (he can open the can) has two different entrJee in its lexicon, whereas a word such as "baclielor" lias only one.
 To handle the p different meanings of sudi polysemies, the following steps are taken •  Usual dlctionnary definitions of words (one definition for a regular word, p tor a ppolysenous word) are input, as given "request" to SPIRIT; the system's answers (one to p for each word) are sets of numbers A.
; these sets are linked to each lexical entry, and stored.
 The lexicon of the system include now, together with morphological and syntactical data, pointers to the knowledge database the A.
  If a polysemous word m has the p meanings : m.
, m.
.
.
 m , its lexical entry Include the sets : A.
, Aj.
.
 A .
 Given, now, the word m in a sentence ŝ  the following operations enable its disambiguation, In a very simple way :  A is the answer of SPIRIT to the sentence s.
  A,, A.
.
.
 A are the answers of SPIRIT to the p different definitions of the meaning of m.
 the greatest of the following intersections : A A a , A^ A A^ A A A give which definition of m shares a maximum of related documents with the sentence a.
 It Is the meaning of m in the given sentence £.
 In order to exemplify how the system actually works, consider the disambiguation of the word : "instruction".
 In french, this word has three meanings : 1) instruction "teaching or education, the taking in charge of schoolage children.
" Given the first definition, the answer of the system A,  120, 513, 519, 1829, 611, 1351, 207.
 '/^'^ 21 Instruction ="Proceedings which bring a case or a lawsuit to trial".
 to this definition, the answer of the system is : A 1761, 1760, 1376, 1393, 1369, 1723, 276.
 37 instruction "Directions, instructions or informations given for indicative purposes".
 answer of the system : A 1802, 2144, 1761, 1367, 2720, 2490.
 (all the numbers here refers to a database of 3000 laws, chosen for the present experiment;.
 Now, given the following sentence : s "gul se charge de 1'instruction de dossiers de recouvrement d'impots" (Who is in charge of the examination of records in tax collection cases), including "instruction", the answer of the system is: A = 276, 1367, 2121, 1761, 1760, 1376, 1393, 1361.
 What is the meaning of "instruction" in the sentence ŝ? The intersection of the answer of the system to ŝ , with the answers to the three definitions of "instruction" are : A rt A :361 A, A A® 276, 1761, 1760, 1376, 1393 A^ A A^ 1367, 1761.
 Thus, the 2nd meaning of "ins truer ion" triggers the greatest intersection, therefore It is the meaning of this word in the context at hand.
 An example of the use of "instruction" in the same meaning is taken out of the document N'' 1761 .
 "le service d'assiette procede a 1'instruction de la demande"(the taxassessment service proceeds to investigate claims) Here, there is a lexicon without any semantic information which enables, however (out of its pointers to the knowledge database) to handle lexical ambiguities in sentences.
 PSYCHOLINGUISTIC EXPERIMENTS.
 riow people process lexical ambiguities? In general, there is two contreversed models to deal with this problem (cf Carey P.
W.
 et al, 1970).
 requiring a lexicon from which meanings are retrieved.
 If more than one meaning are retrieved, the wrong ones are then inhibited; the inhibition hypothesis is also invoked to explain subluminary experiments were people are able to implicltely use some semantic properties of words they are unable to report, or even to notice (cf D.
A.
 Allport, 1977) We will present two psychoUnguistic experiments which require either a meaningretrieval and inhibition mechanism, or, alternatively, some abstract lexicon such as the one above.
 Experiment 1.
 Written words were tachistoscopically presented in pairs, with visual masking conditions, in a speed which allowed subjects to report at most one of them.
 177 All the words were nouns, and they Include the french homograph : "fils" (which means either "son" or "threads"); this word is not an homophone, and when it means "son" it is uttered /fls/, and /fil/, for "threads".
 The written word "fils" was displayed together with either the word "father" or the word "needle".
 (E.
 Andreewsky et al, 1978).
 The subject's sole pronoonciation /fis/ or /fil/ testifies in favor of the implicit resolution of the written polysemy; this resolution was found to be in accordance with the "ungrasped" codisplayed noun (father or needle) The subjects' utterances testifies therefore in favor of implicit use of the "meaning" of words, displayed but not understood.
 Experiment 2.
 M.
L.
 Albert et al (1973) propose a method socalled the "oddwordouttest".
 Subjects are asked to point to the odd item in a written list, such as "hat" in ; "cat, dog, pig, hat, wolf".
 There are alexic subjects, who can neither read aloud nor understand (i.
e.
 match with proper pictured items) any of the written nouns in the list, but can, nevertheless, perform the "oddwordouttest".
 We have reported (G.
Deloche et al, on press), in the context of the above task, the behavior of one of those alexic subjects : he gives 8 correct answers out of 10 lists of 5 written items, all of which he cannot understand.
 Therefore, since semantic cues are obviously required for the selection of odd items, such a patient displays, here again, the ability to make implicit use of the "meaning" of words he "sees", without being able to understand.
 REFERENCES.
  Albert, M.
L.
 , Yamadori, A.
, Gardner, H.
 and Howes, (1973), Comprehension In Alexia, "brain", Vol.
 96, part 2, 317328.
  AUport, D.
A.
 (1977) On knowing the meaning of words we are unable to report : the effect of visual masking.
 In "Attention and Performance", Uornic (ed) Lawrence Erlbaum, New Jersey, 505533.
 Andreewsky, A.
, Deblll, F.
 , Fluhr, C.
 (1980).
 Apprentlssage Synta:ie semantlque lexicale.
"Revue du Palais de la Decouverte", Vol.
 9, N°  83, 17^0.
 Andreewsky, E.
, Deioche , C , and Kossanyl, P.
 (1979).
 Towards a procedural understanding of reading INS Conf.
, Noordwijkerhout, Holland, (in "Les processus de la Lecture", special issue, 1978).
  Carey, P.
W.
, Mehler, J.
 and Bever, T.
G.
 (1970) Judging the veracity of ambiguous sentences.
 "Journal of Verbal learning and Verbal Behavior", 9, 243254.
  Deioche, G.
, /indreewsky, E.
 , and Desl, M.
 (on press) Surface dyslexia : a case report and some theoretical implications to reading models.
 "Brain and Language".
  JohnsonLaird, P.
N.
 (1980).
 Mental models in cognitive science.
 "Cognitive Science", 4, 71115.
  Marcel, A.
J.
 (on press).
 Conscious and unconscious reading : The effects of visual masking on word perception.
 "Cognitive Psychology" The question arises then ; how people can manage "to see and not to see" written items, that Is make an implicit use of the meaning of written words whlcli are not understood? This Is the case In the two above experiments, such as In many others (Cf A.
 Marcel, on press).
 Under a structural model of the human lexicon, from which meaning of words should be stored and retrieved.
 It is impossible to explain these experiments without a strongly ad hoc hypothesis on an inhibition mechanism, following the retrieval of a lexical meaning (explaining how one can make use of a word meaning, and not understand this word).
 An alternative explanation can be carried out, grounded on such an abstract lexicon as described In the A.
I.
 part of this paper.
 In the system described above, the lexicon does not include semantic informations, but only sets of pointers to the knowledge database.
 The retrieval of pointers is a preprocessing towards word understanding.
 It is clear that these pointers provide enough information even not semantic to explain how people may "see and not see" the meaning of words.
 For Instance, in the case of the alexic patient, if such pointers would be retrieved, without further processing of the meaning of words, the patient will perfectly well be able to point to the odd word, out of an Intersection between the pointers of the list, without having any idea on any written word meaning.
 Therefore, our A.
l.
 approach not only allows a very simple way to handle lexical ambiguities, but also provides a theory to explain liow people can manage to see and not to see a word, that is to implicitely use semantic properties of nonunderstood written items.
 178 E/MOTIONAL MEMORY AS A MEDIATING CONSTRUCT IN THE STUDY OF PERSON/ENVIRONMENT INTERACTION.
 Marisa Zavalloni, Department of Psychology, University of Montreal.
 Recent trends in social and environmental psychology underlie the importance of studying psychological processes through which a person and his/her environment interact (Bronfenbrenner, 1979).
 At the same time, it has become more and more apparent that psychology has established a methodological and epistemological tradition which is not adapted to the study of interactive phenomena (Cronbach, 1975; Proshansky, 1970).
 The traditional approach of scientific psychology is based on the comparison of average responses measured on an aggregate, and it aims to elicit general properties of the psychological system, such as attitudes, values, and needs, which allegedly represent the basic parameters of hypothetical constructs through which it is hoped that one day it will be possible to explain the complex functioning of the mind.
 However, as Feldman and Lewontin (1975) note, there is a vast loss of information in going from a complex machine to a few descriptive parameters and an immense indeterminacy in trying to infer the structure of the machine from those few descriptive parameters.
 Moreover, the data thus obtained refer to average characteristics of a group and not to properties expressing some transaction between the person and his/her environment.
 The development of a social/ecological and interactive psychology will require a methodological pe.
spective capable of producing a concrete research program having as prerequisite a much clearer understanding of what it means to study interactive phenomena as they operate in the real world.
 If the epistemological orientation in psychology today appears to be acquiring an interactive and constructivist outlook, it would be wrong to assume that we witness a harmonious development in this direction.
 On the contrary, as discussed elsewhere (Zavalloni and LouisGuSrin, 1979), we are in a period of transition and uneasiness, characterized by a widening gap between the theoretical reflection and its concrete applications.
 The constructivist, interactive perspective in psychology has found persuasive defenders in recent years, yet very much has to be done to translate the implications of this perspective into a research model and to devise concrete methods for its application.
 The major problem is how to have access to the processes at work in the internal construction of reality of which environmental perception is one of the elements.
 The fundamental question to be raised in this connection is, are there empirically detectable structures respcnsible for these processes, or will this level of psychological functioning in the real world remain beyond the reach of psychologists? Our research goal was to discover through the Social Identity Inquirer (SII) the relation between the objective social identity of a person and his/her internal operant environment (Zavalloni and LouisGu6rin, 1981).
 The SI I represents a complex procedure based on a method called representational contextual ization.
 The procedure comprises different phases each using different technics: free association, focused introspection and associative network analysis.
 The results obtained indicate that the linguistic encoding or categorization through which we evaluate the sociocultural environment constitutes only one aspect of what is activated in the brain when a person enunciates these categories.
 The method of representational contextual ization has permitted to identify several psychological components which accompany tacitly the evaluation categories people use to describe the environment such as images, collective and biographical memories and events that act as recoding features of the general stimuli used to produce the categories.
 These contextual components may be seen as constituting the psychological meaning of a category in contrast to its semantic meaning as provided by a dictionary or common sense.
 At the same time, they disclose the content of the internal operant environment.
 The method of representational contextualization is designed to elicit the latent connections between a concept or category and images, thoughts, and experiences which constitute its background.
 The principal feature of this method is to provide a display of cognitive material which is never accessible to consciousness or research in its totality, but which is experienced in a segmented way at different times under particular situations of elicitation.
 The resulting combination of words, images, and memories whose connections have been found stable over time has been defined as conceptual e/motional cluster and appears to constitute the units of representational thinking.
 What are activated are the ideational and experiential features which sunmarize the salient aspects of the transaction between the individual and his/her environment, and which in the natural situation inhabit the periphery of consciousness.
 The conceptuale/motional cluster as a unit activated when a respondent is asked to evaluate an element of the sociophysical environment includes the following components: 1) Representational unit (RU): category of concept, 2) Implicit operant referent, 3) Prototype images 4) Episodes (exemplifying memory), 5) Subjective meaning of RU.
 These components can be described as follow: 1) The representational unit (RU) represents one of the categories or concepts used by a person to evaluate an element of the sociophysical environment (groups of identity, of alterity and feature of the physical environment.
 The sum of all the RUs constitutes the semantic repertory of a person, descriptive of his/her internal environment.
 2) The implicit operant referent.
 The linguistic categories (RUs) used to describe a group in general or other environmental features are mediated by a subgroup and/or individuals important in the life space of the respondent.
 These were found, through repeated elicitations over time to be stable features of a respondent associative thinking.
 This result indicates the existence of a recoding mechanism by which objective groups are translated into particular subgroups and/or individuals evolving in a sociophysical environment.
 The respondent is rarely aware that his/ her linguistic encoding is generated by these implicit operant referents and not by the manifest stimulus to which he/she responds.
 The sum of the implicit operant referents constitutes the sociophysical microcosm of a person.
 3) The prototype images are also stable features of memory content and/or symbolic images associated to each RU as descriptors of the environment.
 179 The sum of these prototype images is part of the microcosm of a person as well as an indicator of the motivational and ideological system of a person.
 4) Episodes (exemplifying memory) are salient features of the group history and of the biography of a respondent.
 They represent those aspects of the sociophysical environment that are embedded in the personal and collective biography.
 5) The subjective semantic refers to subjective connotation of the categories used (RUs), when applied to a particular referent.
 This subjective meaning emerges as a complex interaction between the general meaning of the linguistic categories and of the referent as a social object.
 It should be emphasized that if the elements of the conceptuale/motional cluster inhabit the periphery of consciousness, in the natural situation, this is due not to their intrinsic nature, but to the situation of elicitation.
 Under a different conditions of stimulation these background data may emerge as manifest response.
 This will occur, for instance, if a person is asked about preferred environments, some important events in his/her life, ideological preferences, etc.
 But this direct elicitation will not permit us to see the processes through which this personal and subjective memory content operates in the evaluation of the sociophysical environment, at a given moment on time.
 What is specific to the representational contextual ization method is that it elicits the unconscious links which exist between a rational discourse, an ideological stance, and the affect, images which are associated to a personal biography.
 The identification of the conceptual e/motional cluster thus as a unit of analysis, constitutes a step toward the empirical study of the relation between language and thinking in the area of self, alter and society.
 A structural analysis described elsewhere (Zavalloni and LouisGuerin, 1981) permits us to detect patterned relations between conceptuale/motional clusters, leading to the identification of what could be called the intrapersonal ideational system.
 This dynamic structure, constituted by a limited number of subsystems called sociomotivational nuclei, represents the articulation between one's aspirations and desires and one's evaluation of the sociophysical environment.
 The sociomotivational nuclei seem to represent some invariant modality for defining, responding to, and adapting to the sociophysical environment.
 This constitutes an affectivecognitive Gestalt which could be defined as e/motional memory.
 Since Tulving (1972) there has been a tendency to distinguish between two types of longterm memory, episodic and semantic.
 Episodic memory contains stored information concerning episodes and events situated in time.
 Semantic memory refers to concepts and abstractions.
 E/motional memory appears to contain those aspects of episodic and semantic memories which are invested with affect (possessing motivational properties and orienting a person's action in the real world).
 The concept of e/motional memory as emerged to describe a dynamic structure empirically linking our memory of the world, our existential project, and our evaluation of the sociophysical environment.
 What we have identified as the internal operant environment can be considered the content of e/motional memory.
 It is important to note that the psychological material thus obtained does not reflect some properties of the organism as it is usually understood and measured through traditional methods (attitude scales, interviews, etc.
).
 Here the organism is seen as indissociable from its umwelt or internal environment, defined as those elements of the sociophysical environment which are enmeshed in its motivational system.
 They are a mixture of stability and change as the individual proceeds through life.
 The internal operant environment (the content of e/motional memory) as a dynamic structure, stored in longterm memory, can provide a baseline for investigating the modalities of person/environment interaction in a particular research situation and as such could be considered as a mediating construct.
 The uncovering of the conceptuale/motional cluster as a unit of representational thinking, has permitted us to set as a goal the exploration of invariances and patterns where there appeared to be a continuously changing and elusive flow of consciousness, a domain which has been considered outside the reach of science, to be left to writers and poets.
 (Marsh, 1977' References Bronfenbrenner, U.
, 1979.
 The Ecology of Human Development.
 Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
 Cronbach, L.
J.
, 1975.
 Beyond the two disciplines of scientific psychology.
 Amer.
 Psychol.
, 30, 116127.
 Feldman, M.
W.
, and Lewontin, R.
C.
, 1975.
 The Heriditability Hangup.
 Science, J90, no.
 4220, 11631168.
 Marsh, 1977.
 A framework for describing subjectivity of consciousness.
 ]n̂  Zinberg, N.
, ed .
, Alternate States of Consciousness, New York: Free Press.
 Proshansky, H.
M.
 et al.
, 1970.
 The influence of the Physical Environment of Behavior: Some Basic Assumptions.
 JH P'^o^^^^^ky, H.
M.
, Ittelson, W.
H.
 and Rivlin, L.
G.
, Environmental Psychology: Nan and his Physical Setting, New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
 Tulving, E.
, 1972.
 Episodic and Semantic Memory.
 In Tulving, E.
 and Donaldson, W.
, Organization of Memory, New York: Academic Press.
 Zavalloni, M.
, 1975.
 Social Identity and the recoding of reality: its relevance for crosscultural psychology.
 Inter.
 Jour, of Psychology, 10, no.
 3, 197217.
 Zavalloni, M.
 and LouisGuerin, C , 1978.
 Environment, perception et memoire.
 Int.
 Rev.
 Appl.
 Psychol.
, 27.
 no.
 1, 18.
 Zavalloni, M.
 and LouisGuerin, C , 1979.
 Social Psychology at the Crossroads: its encounter with cognitive and ecological psychology and the interactive perspective.
 Eur.
 Jour, of Social Psychology.
 9, no.
 3, 302322.
 Zavalloni, M.
 and LouisGuerin, C , 1981.
 Identite et pensee sociale.
 cation).
 (Submitted for publi180 THE PERCEPTION OF DISORIENTED COMPLEX OBJECTS Steven P.
 Shwartz Cognitive Science Program Yale University New Haven, CT 06 520 Abstract Subjects were presented realworld objects at varying quired to name then.
 Naming with the angular departure o from the object's canonical or suits suggest that, at least variant features that uniquely are not present, subjects internal representation of the nonical orientation in order ognition process.
 with pictures of orientations and relatencies increased f the pictured object ientation.
 The rewhen orientationinidentify the object mentally rotate an object into its cato complete the recIntroduction Theories of visual perception are divided on the issue of how the human visual system recognizes objects at nonstandard orientations.
 Some theorists argue that the visual system searches for orientationinvariant features and bases perceptual recognition on these features (e.
g.
 Milner, 1974).
 The fact that certain common objects seem to be immediately recognizable at nonstandard orientations is compatible with this view.
 Other theorists (e.
g.
 Rock, 1973) argue that in order to recognize a disoriented object, the object must be first imagined in its canonical orientation.
 The fact that some complex objects (e.
g.
 faces) are difficult to recognize when disoriented supports this position.
 The classic experiments of Cooper and Shepard (1975) suggest that in order to imagine disoriented objects at their standard orientations subjects perform a mental rotation of an internal representation of the object.
 The Cooper and Shepard paradigm required subjects to judge whether or not a presented letter had a normal or mirrorreversed form.
 They foind that the time to make this decision was a monotonic function of the angular distance of the orientation of the presented letter from the canonical orientation of the letter.
 This suggests that before it was possible to make the required judgement, it was first necessary to perform a mental rotation of an internal representation of the presented letter in order to imagine it in its canonical orientation.
 However, as Cooper results may have been developed by subjects fo the normal vs.
 mirro normal and mirrorimage guished on the basis of this reason, the Cooper not strong evidence t mally used in the recogn jects.
 In fact, Corbal Butler (1978) have shown cumstances (i.
e.
 when determine whether a pres ified target letter o ters), the time to ident of the orientation of th and Shepard noted, these due to a special strategy r the purpose of performing riroage judgement because letters can not be distindistinctive features.
 For and Shepard experiments are hat mental rotation is norition of disoriented oblis, Zbrodoff, Shetzer, and that under certain cira subject is required to ented stimulus was a specr one of 5 distractor letify a letter is independent e presented letter.
 Thus, it is clear that people are capable of performing mental rotations on internal representations of perceptual stimuli in order to normalize the orientation of the perceptual stimulus prior to recognition.
 However, it is equally clear that mental rotation is not always required for the recognition of disoriented forms.
 Under certain conditions, people are capable of utilizing distinctive features of perceptual stimuli in order to recognize disoriented perceptual stimuli.
 In the Cooper and Shepard study, subjects were forced to use mental rotation because of a lack of available distinctive features.
 In the Corballis et.
 al.
 study, it was possible that subjects were able to extract a small set of features that could be used for identification of the target letter and that these features were recognizable at all orientations.
 The purpose of the present study is to determine the extent to which mental rotation is used in the perceptual recognition of disoriented objects that a person might encounter in the physical world.
 In the present study, subjects are presented with drawings of physical world objects at varying orientations and required to identify them by name.
 If mental rotation is used to identify disoriented stimuli, then the time required to identity each stimulus object should be a monotonic function of the angular distance of the presented stimulus object from the canonical orientation of the object.
 Subjects were tested on novel stimuli i.
e.
 subjects had no foreknowledge of the indentities of the objects they would see — in order to ensure that they could not use a strategy of searching only for a few particular features.
 Figure 1.
 Examples of the stimulus objects used in the experiment.
 Method Subjects.
 Twelve subjects from The Johns Hopkins University served as subjects in the experiment in partial fulfillment of a course requirement.
 Materials and Apparatus.
 The stimuli used in the experiment consisted of 48 xeroxed drawings of realworld objects, examples of which are shown in Figure 1.
 The stimulus set included 15 animals, 30 inanimate objects, and 3 wellknown faces (Washington, Carter, and Reagan).
 Six versions of each of the 48 drawings 181 were constructed, one at each of the following angular departures (in degrees) from the object's normal upright: 0, 60, 120, 180, 240, and 300.
 The stimuli were presented to subjects individually in a twofield tachistoscope, subtending an average horizontal and vertical angle of 3.
2 degrees.
 Procedure.
 On each trial of the experiment, the experimenter simultaneously said the word "READY" and pressed a button initiating the trial.
 After a .
5 sec warning interval, the stimulus was presented and remained visible until the subject verbally named the depicted object.
 The subject's verbal response triggered a voice activated relay tliat stopped a response timer and the subject's response latency was recorded.
 Before the start of the experiment, the experimenter explained the operation of the voice key and gave each subject practice at triggering the voice key only at the time of response.
 Each subject was instructed to verbally name each stimulus as rapidly as possible without making errors.
 In order to reduce the ambiguity of possible stimulus names, subjects were instructed that the response given should be the name that one would normally use in referring to the stimulus object and, as an example were told that the correct response to a picture of an animal is the name of the animal (and not "animal").
 Design.
 Each subject received 48 test trials, one for each of the 48 objects.
 Each subject was tested on 8 trials at each of the 6 orientations.
 Thus, each subject was tested on only one of the 6 orientations for each stimulus in order to ensure that a novel stimulus was presented on each trial.
 For each set of 6 subjects, each of the 48 objects were tested at each of the 6 orientations.
 Each subject received 12 practice trials with stimulus objects that were not included in the set of test stimulus objects.
 Results.
 Responses were considered correct when the name given was appropriate and was not the name of a superordinate category.
 The largest number of errors made by a subject was 4 and error trials were not included in the analyses.
 The latency data were analyzed separately with both subjects and objects as random variables.
 The direction of disorientation — clockwise (50 and 120 degrees) vs.
 counterclockwise (300 and 240 degrees) — had no effect on response latencies \F_ < 1 for both subjects and objects], nor was there a significant direction x orientation (60 vs.
 120 degrees) interaction [F < 1 for both subjects and objects).
 For this reason, the data for the 60 and 300 degree orientations as well as for the 120 and 240 degree orientations were not distinguished in the analyses.
 The primary results of the experiment are shown in Figure 2.
 As can be in Figure 2, there is a monotonic effect of the angular departure from the canonical orientation of the object on response latencies I mill F' = 3.
519, £ < .
05].
 This analysis was also run without inclusion of the 3 faces and the pattern of results did not change as a result of this analysis.
 This result is compatible with the view that normalization of orientation occurs prior to recognition.
 1.
75 ri,25 (if 120°  ORIENTATION Figure 2.
 Reaction time as a function of the angle of departure from the canonical orientation of the object.
 For each of the 48 bestfitting straight li orientation of the object computed using linear reg coefficient of the regress how well the data are fit The median correlation coe 35 positive correlation tive coefficients.
 These linear trend in evidenc evidence that recognition the degree of angular de canonical orientation incr Discussion.
 stimulus objects, the ne relating the angular to response latency was ression.
 The correlation ion provides a measure of ted by a linear function.
 fficient was .
602, with coefficients and 12 negadata, along with the e in Figure 2, constitute difficulty increases as parture from the object's eases.
 These results are consistent with the view that people use mental rotation to normalize their internal representations of visual stimuli in order to facilitate recognition.
 However, while a monotonic function of orientation was found for most of the stimuli used in the present experiment, there were stimulus objects for which such a trend was not found.
 Since orientation is manipulated betweensubjects — i.
e.
 no subject sees a stimulus at more than a single orientation — the nonmonotonicallyincreasing trends could have been due to noisy data.
 However, it is equally likely that for some of these stimuli, there do exist orientationinvariant features that are used to identify the object.
 For example, three objects for which a linear trend was not found were the owl, the alligator, and the gun.
 It is easy to imagine how the big eyes of the owl, the long teeth and curvy tail of the alligator, and the barrel and trigger of the gun can serve to uniquely identify each without mental rotation.
 These features are easy to spot at arbitrary orientations and are unique to these objects.
 Corballis et to obtain identif were independent positive and ne restricted (by re positive and nega that in the Co restrictions had validity of certa could be idcnti the point where identify the et.
 al.
 were able available orient ficient to unique .
 al.
 (1978) were similarly able ication functions for letters that of orientation when the sets of gative features were sufficiently stricting the sizes of the sets of tive letters).
 It is hypothesized rballis et.
 al.
 experiment these the effect of increasing the cue in features of the letters that tied at arbitrary orientations to these features could uniquely letter.
 That is, Corballis to create a context in which the at ioninvariant features were sufly identify the letter.
 182 The results of the present experiment suggest the following algorithm for the identification of disoriented perceptual stimuli: When orientationinvariant features are available and are sufficient to uniquely identify an object, they are used.
 However, when such features are not available, or when these features do not uniquely identify the object, a mental rotation of the internal representation of the object is performed in order to extract features that are not orientationinvariant .
 The author wishes to thank Pierre Jolicoeur for a helpful discussion of some of the issues involved in this research, Nancy Tang for collecting the data, and Ray Gibbs for comments on the manuscript.
 References Cooper, L.
 A.
 Shepard,R.
N.
, Chronometric studies of rotation of mental images, in V.
G.
 Chase (Ed.
), Visual Information Processing.
 New York: Academic, 1973.
 Corballis, M.
 C , Zbrodoff, N.
 J.
, Shetzer, L.
 I.
 & Butler, P.
 B.
 Decisions about identity and orientation of rotated letters and digits, Memory and Cognition.
 1974, 6(2), 98 107.
 Hilner, P.
 A.
 A model for visual shape recognition.
 Psychological Review.
 1974, 81.
 521  535.
 Rock, I.
 Orientation and form.
 New York: Academic Press, 1973.
 183 The Role of [ntrinslc Axes In Shape Recognition Mariannp Wiser Massachusetts Institutp of Technology This paper presents a model for the mental representation of visual shapes which accounts for their recognition in different orientations, including novel ones.
 It is motivated by the following considerations.
 Some shapes are easier than others to recognize after rotation in space.
 For example, it is easv to see that Fig.
 la and Fig.
 lb represent the same shape in two different positions whereas Fig.
 2a and Fig.
 2b seem to represent two different shapes.
 This suggests that a rotationinvariant representation is more readily available for shape 1 than for shape 2.
 Shapes that are easily recognized in different positions are also perceived as in a specific orientation with respect to an external frame of reference (here, the page); for example, shape 1 looks vertical in Fig.
 la and oblique in Fig.
 lb.
 Shape 2, on the other hand, is not per ceived as in any specific orientation.
 V< Fig.
 1 Fiq.
 2 Shapes like shape 1 are perceived as oriented because they have an axis of their own, determined by their aeometrical properties (symmetry, elongation, parallel sides).
 The position of their axis relative to the side of the page determines their perceived orientation.
 1 will call this axis "intrinsic" because it is fixed within the shape and exists independently of any other direction in space.
 In contrast, axes like the retinal or gravitational vertical, or the side of the page are "external" because their direction is independent of the shape being perceived.
 Shape 2 is not perceived as oriented because it lacks axisdetermining properties.
 Rock (1973) proposes a theory that explains why shapes like shape 2 are difficult to recognize after rotation.
 VJhen a shape is perceived, it is described in a specific spatial frame of reference (e.
g.
 the page); shapes are compared and recognized on the basis of this description.
 If the shape is rotated with respect to the frame of reference being used, its description changes and consequently, it is hard to recognize.
 Rock uses the notion of description within a frame of reference to explain why the change in retinal orientation that occurs when an observer tilts his head does not affect the percept of the shape, whereas the same change, when it results from tilting the shape itself (with the observer's head upright), generally makes the shape look different (as in Fig.
 2).
 He suggests that the description tends to be oerformed in a gravitational, rather than retinal.
 frame of reference.
 As long as the shape has a fixed position in space, its gravitational description does not change and it will, therefore, look the same although its position on the observer's retina changes.
 This theory explains why the world does not tilt when we tilt our heads, but it also predicts that we should not be able to recognize a shape rotated in space since, in that case, the description within both the gravitational and the retinal frames of reference change, A fortiori, it cannot explain the differences between shape 1 and shape 2.
 I propose that, when a shape has an intrinsic axis, it is used as a frame of reference to compute a description of the shape, the intrinsic description, which is indeoendent of its position in the external frame of reference.
 More precisely, the intrinsic axis and a perpendicular to it form a system of coordinates or frame of reference: the intrinsic frame of reference (Fig.
 3).
 During the encoding of the shaoe.
 4Yn A a E (a) Description in teniis of external coordinates (X^, Yg) (b) Position of the intrinsic axis Yj in the external frame (c) Description in terms of intrinsic coordinates (Xj, Yj) Fig.
 3 the shape is described in terms of intrinsic coordinates, i.
e.
, its elements are localized within the intrinsic frame of reference.
 Such a description is rotationinvariant because the intrinsic frame of reference is fixed within the shape.
 The intrinsic axis therefore plays a dual role in the perception of the shape.
 On the one hand, it indicates the position of the shape in the external frame of reference; on the other, it is the frame of reference in which an invariant description of the shape can be built.
 The intrinsic axis makes it possible to keep separate the invariant part of the information contained in an external description (the identity of the shape) from the source of variation in the external description (the orientation of the shape in the external frame).
 The experiment reported here provides evidence that the intrinsic axis and the intrinsic description are part of the mental representation of shapes.
 In this experiment, I will not attempt to distinguish between retinal and gravitational frames.
 Both are external, as opposed to the intrinsic frame.
 The subjects in the experiment were tested with head upright so that the retinal and gravitational frames coincided.
 I will refer to this frame as retinal, to simplify.
 Experiment A learning and recognition paradigm was used to test the hypothesis that the recognition of shapes with intrinsic axes is based on their intrinsic descriptions.
 Two models for the memory reoresentation of shapes are contrasted: the retinal encoding model and the intrinsic encoding model.
 In the retinal encoding model, the intrinsic axis plays no role in the processing of the shapes, which are treated like shapes without intrinsic axes.
 They are stored in memory as retinal descriptions (i.
e.
 184 spatial descriptions in terms of retinal coordinates).
 In the intrinsic encoding model, it is the intrinsic description which is stored in memory.
 Shapes with intrinsic axes were presented for learning in either a vertical, oblique, or horizontal position.
 They were simple two dimensional nonsense shapes (Fig.
 4).
 Q Fig.
 4 '^ilf The task was to recognize them among distractors when they were presented again in either the same or one of the other two positions.
 The subjects had to say "yes" as fast as possible if they recognized a shape they had learned and "no" if the' did not.
 They were warned before the recognition session (but not before the learning session) that some shapes would be rotated.
 A "yes" shape was seen in one of 9 combinations of orientations: VV (vertical during learning/vertical during testing), VO (vertical during learning/oblique during testing), VH (vertical during learning/horizontal during testing), OV (oblique during learning/ vertical during testing), etc.
 For shapes seen in an oblique or horizontal position, the intrinsic frame of reference does not coincide with the retinal frame, and, thus, the intrinsic descriotion differs from the retinal one.
 Depending on whether the retinal or the intrinsic description Is used to represent the shape in memory, a different pattern of reaction times was predicted in each of the 9 conditions.
 The retinal encoding model predicts that RT's should be faster when the learning and testing orientations are the same (i.
e.
 when the retinal description of the target matches the description in memory) than when they differ.
 This is justified by numerous experiments in which shapes without intrinsic axes were used (Dearborn, 1899, Shinar and Owen, 1973; Rock, 1973).
 Therefore conditions VV, 00 and HH should be equally fast and faster than conditions VO, VH, OV, OH, HV, and HO.
 The intrinsic model on the other hand predict that shapes tested vertically should be faster to recognize than shapes tested in an oblique or horizontal position, irrespective of the orientation in which they were learned.
 This prediction is based on the assumption that the encoding of the intrinsic description requires more processing when the shape is oblique or horizontal than when it is vertical.
 The geometrical properties that determin the intrinsic axis, such as symmetry, are detected faster about a vertical than an oblique axis (Julez 1971) and the building of the intrinsic description itself involves a shift in perceptual frame of refe ence when the shape is not vertical.
 Therefore con ditions VV, OV and HV should be equally fast and faster than conditions VO, VH, 00, OH and HH.
 Since the models tested in this experiment co cern the memory representation of the shapes, the analysis of the "yes" responses only will be considered, It was run on RT's in msec, for correct responses.
 Fig 5 shows that the pattern of RT's supports the intrinsic encoding model for horizontal as well as oblique shapes.
 110 ibo 750 T« ISO 120 110 700 RT(msec) VV VO V>4 ov oo oH Fig.
 5 riv Ho HX An ANOVA shows that recognition time depends upon testing orientation only: vertical shapes are faster than oblique shapes and oblique shapes faster than horizontal shapes (F 21, P 10° , df 140).
 The effect of learning orientation and the interaction between learning and testing orientations are nonsignificant.
 As predicted by the intrinsic encoding model, vertical shapes are easy to recognize, irrespective of the orientation in which they were learned whereas oblique and horizontal shapes take longer.
 The paired comparison of all combinations of learning and testing orientations (Student's Tcorrelated scores test) further supports the intrinsic model and infirms the retinal model.
 The crucial comparisons are between VO and OV and between VH and HV.
 The retinal encoding model predicted that they should be equally slow because they involve the same angular shift between learning and testing orientations.
 This is obviously not the case.
 OV and HV are as fast as VV and significantly faster than VO (t=2.
7,df=lll,P=.
01) and VH (t=3.
6, df=lll,P<.
01) respectively.
 These results support the hypothesis that the intrinsic description is stored in memory, irrespective of the learning orientation, and is retreived faster when the shape to be recognized is vertical than when it is oblique or horizontal.
 Nonvertical shapes go through the same extraprocessing whether the test orientation is the same as the learning orientation or not; 00 and HH are slower than OV and HV respectively, the latter significantly so (t=2.
04,df=lll,P=.
04).
 Thus, even when retinal descriptions match, a shape is recognized on the basis of its intrinsic description.
 There is a strong linear dependence of RT's upon the angle between the intrinsic axis of the target and the vertical, for shapes learned vertically and obliquely.
 (The reason why it does not hold for shapes learned horizontally will not be discussed here.
) This suggests that mental rotation might be involved in the encoding of the intrinsic description: the intrinsic description of a nonvertical shape might be obtained by mentally rotating the shape until its intrinsic axis is vertical in the perceptual frame of reference.
 The average linear slope (1.
5° /msec.
) is consistent with the rates of mental rotation found in other experiments (Cooper and Shepard, 1973; Shinar and Owen, 1973).
 185 Conclusions The experiment above shows that the intrinsic axes of shapes play an important role in their mental representation.
 The intrinsic description is stored in memory and retrieved during recognition irrespective of the orientation in which a shape is seen.
 To store the intrinsic description in memory is both economical and effective.
 The memory representation is unique and allows the shapes to be recognized in novel orientations.
 I have found in other experiments that the intrinsic description is also used to compare shapes presented simultaneously in different orientations.
 These experiments also support the hypothesis that mental rotation is involved in the encoding of the intrinsic description: in lateralization studies, the perception of nonvertical shapes shows a righthemisphere effect.
 The intrinsic description appears to be inherent to the mental representation of shapes with intrinsic axes.
 Experiments in which shapes are presented very briefly and have to be identified among similar shapes in the same orientation presented immediately afterwards, show that oblique and horizontal shapes require longer exposure times to be identified correctly.
 This orientation effect can be attributed to the extraprocessing involved in the computation of the intrinsic axes and/or the intrinsic description of nonvertical shapes.
 If shapes could be identified on the basis of a retinal description, indentification should be independent of orientation.
 Palmer (1978) has shown that the descriptions on which recognition is based are highlevel, articulated descriptions.
 The experiments just described suggest that the intrinsic description must be encoded before recognition occurs.
 This in turn suggests that the only articulated descriptions are relative to the intrinsic frame of reference.
 The following model can now be outlined for the processing of twodimensional shapes with intrinsic axes.
 I will assume that the mental representation of shapes consists of a series of descriptions in spatial frames of reference, from lowlevel and local to highlevel and articulated.
 Lowlevel descriptions are encoded in the retinal frame of reference (the earliest one being the distribution of light on the retina).
 Intrinsic axes are computed at an early stage of the processing.
 It has been shown that symmetry can be computed from local descriptions (Julez, 1971) and I have found that perceived elongation is based on principal axes of inertia which can also be computed from lowlevel descriptions.
 The position of the intrinsic axis relative to the retinal vertical determines the perceived orientation of the shape.
 The perceptual frame of reference is then shifted to the intrinsic frame and higherlevel descriptions are elaborated within the intrinsic frame.
 The intrinsic description is stored in memory.
 It is the description on which recognition is based.
 References Cooper, L.
A.
 and Shepard, R.
N.
 "Chronometric studies of the rotation of mental images," in W.
G.
 Chase (ed.
).
 Visual information processing.
 New York: Academic Press, 1973.
 Dearborn, G.
 "Recognition under objective reversal," Psycho, rev.
.
 1899, 6, 98107 Julez, B.
 Foundations of cyclopean perception.
 Chicago: Univ.
 of Chicago Press, 1971 Palmer, S.
E.
 "Structural aspect of visual similarity, Mem.
 cogn.
, 6, 91^7, 1978 Rock, I.
 Orientation and form.
 New York: Academic Press, 1973 Shinar, D.
 and Owen, D.
H.
 "Effects of form rotation on the speed of classification; The development of shape constancy," Perc.
 osychophys.
, 1973, 14̂ , 149154 186 Â ID ASPtrrS OF VISUAL ATTENTTON by Rogpr A.
 BrorfS"? Drpartment of Conputer Scionc} Oniversity of British '^olimbia Vancouver B.
C.
 Canada I.
 TTFROrxiCTICM Ttiis papor explores relations between arn>!cts of visual attention an(3 the operations of schep«tabnse<i conpijtational vision systems.
 Ttiese relations are 3hcn.
Ti to suggest the requirenient for methods wliich operate toivards interpretation without model invocation.
 A specific mechanism is described which permits interpretation based interaction between information from different resolution levels, but does not rely on node! invocation.
 This mechanism is then used in the examination of some related perceptual phenomena, permitting a more corputational viê ; of their cperations.
 IT.
 SOI'IMATABA.
SED VISICN SYSTEMS An issue of interest to both cognitive psychology and artificial intelligence is the question of hO'i knozHedge of a domain of obiects can he applied tovards visual interpretation.
 Schematabasei knowledge organizations (Rumelhart and Ortony, 1976; Noisser, 1976) are nc/ being used to address tJiis issue (Freuder, 1976; Havens, 1978; Havens and Mackworth, 1980; Browse, 1980).
 One distinctive feature of a scliervatabased interpretation is the organization of its domain kncrviedge along "natural" lines.
 Tlie knowledge is obiect centered and relies on f̂ amiliar structuring mechanisms such as conponent and instance hierarchies.
 A doliviin of knoivledge structured in this wav is conducive to a recursive cuing mechanism (Havens, 1978): txasic image elements act as cues for siFple scf>ne obiects, which in turn act as cues for more complex objects, etc.
 For example; in the 'Vmafn of line drawings of humanlike body forms (Brcvse, 1980; 1981), a certain configuration of lines may cue a "hanfi", which in turn cues "arm", which cues "hotly".
 At each lev<»i of this hierarchy, objects are described as teing oonposed of sinpler objects.
 Tlie occurrence of the objects wliich are required in the description rmy not be enough, hcvever, to con'^irm the "'<istence of tlie more comolex object.
 There are also relations v/hich must be val id among the cnnponents.
 This Mstinction will he referred to as the distinction hetv/een having found the required elements and having met the required relations.
 For exairpl", all the required elements trvay exist to irake up an "arm": the "hand", the "upperarm", and tlie "lowerarm", but a numlx̂ r of required relations must also hold.
 The elements ntist be connected in a certain way, and the angles hetw^on t'le elements mls^ be within certain bounds.
 '.
fliile it is difficult to l)e certain of tho presi^nce of an oliject on the basis of the rcquif^d r>lf>monts only, •.
•̂  shall sof that there are special si^uations in which this information is v^ry valuable.
 Tliese situations rely on a capability of groupinq image elements.
 During the interpretation process, any element X in the iirvage will have associate! with it a set of model possibilities (or labels).
 This set is sirrply the set of all objects '̂ /hich are described using X as a required element.
 In tiie absence of a means of grouping elements, the interpretation process nay deal with the discovery of an element by taking the course of Rpdei invocation {or testing).
 This operation involves selecting one or more o*" the morlel possibilities, and testing for their existence by locating the other required elements, and determining the validity of their required relations.
 "rtie model invocation approacli can prc/ide a dynamic determination of wliether the processing procedos topdom or bottomup (see Havens, 1978).
 As well it can provide a means of iterative refinement of Interpretation and segmentation (see Mackworth, 1978), The operation of rtndel invocation can, hcvever, he costly because it is exhaustive search over the model possibilities.
 On some occasions it may be feasible to delete some of the model possibilities without actually invoking them.
 This is oossible ivhenever uniform constraining relations can be devised over a type of image element.
 For example, if 'Je know that certain lines must be a part of the same object, then the malel possibility sets for tliose lines can be intersected.
 Waltz (1972) has shovn that such a uniform constraint may be formulated for the interpretation of line drawings of the blocksworld.
 The result was that sutjsequent backtrack search was seldom required.
 Mackworth (1977) has provided a generalization of the use of such network consistency methods in artificial intell igf̂ noe problems.
 III.
 FFAT07U5 nTTRGRATICN mO WDEL INVOCATION Recently in cognitive psychology there have emerged theoretical ideas about visual attention \4iich relate to the notions of model invocation and oprrations on sets of norlel possibilities.
 The Feature Integration Theory of attention (Treisman and Gelade, 1980) proposes that individual iimge features are detected rapidlv and in parallel, but, in order that an object be identifiefl as consisting of two or more separate features, locations must be processed serially with fooal attention.
 If this is prevented, illusory conjuctions may be forme<l (Treisman and Schmidt, 1981) .
 Tlius, in human vision, the application of focal attention is.
 required by mr>lel invocation.
 There is an increased expense which accompanies the application of focal attention.
 Treisman, Sykes, and nelade (1977) have shcnvn that the amount of time required to detect objects nade up of a conjunction of features increases linearly with the display size, but that display size does not have such a great effect on the detection of objects which can be defined without consideration of the relations among features.
 In CoT̂ vita'.
ional terms, these objects can be identified only by the examination of model possibility sets to determinf the prr><'nce of required elements, wliereas conjunction obiects require the establishment of the relation of commn soatial location between features.
 187 file:///4iichTo TCike th<? relation nore clear, consider an ex.
jTTplo tnken from pxporimont IV of Treisron an<i Gel.
ifle (1980): Q (a) tarrjot "R" (b) tarqfjt "T" Fiqure 1: lvo soarch conditions Hepictod as features whicli cortpose the letters, with their '•'̂ tT of nr>lel possibilities attachefl.
 The tisk was to detect the presence of one of the tarqots "R" or "r" in a visual field of "P"s and "0"s.
 Feature integration theory predicts that the search time will increase linearly with display si^e for the "R" target, and will increase less for the "T" target.
 This prediction was found to l)o correct.
 The difference between the bJO conditions is shryvn in figure 1.
 For the target "R".
 the required elernents (features) are available in b'lo d'Tforent ways: either by the presence of an "R" or by adjacent "P" and "0".
 In this target condition, the relations among the required elements Tust Ix? examined.
 rriFTputational ly, this means invoking the molel for an "H" each time its required elements are present.
 Tlie tarq̂ t "T" can 1>» detected by only examining the model possibilities for tlie primitives because the required f^eatures can only bo present if the target is present.
 There are indications that it is conputationally more expensive to invoke models than to use consistency motliods (VJaltz, 1972; Mackivorth, 1977).
 Tlv» proposed relation between moilel invocation an.
l feature integration ;K3ds to the iustificatlon for the search "̂ or conputational methods which can operate towards interoretation at the preinvocation level.
 TV.
 FILTERIfJG ACROSS RFSOfXTTirW TEVErS Follaving the clues provided in the previous secticns.
 Browse (1931) has rievisn'l a method wliich permits tlie interaction between information obtainwl at different levels of resolution.
 This method operates towards interpretation, but before model invocation.
 A Bchematabasf>d representation for the kno'tflef'ge of the bodyform structure has been developed, "nns knowledge is specified in terms of image primitives attainable at two different levels of resolution in ttie image (lines and blobs).
 Areas of the image for which tlie correspondence of image primitives across levels is knovn are areas in wliich the follcving uniform constraining relations nny be applie<l: 1.
 For any blob vhich mist have an integral interpretation, the corresponding lines must all have a coimon interpretation model.
 Thus the s'̂ ts of model possibilities for each of tlie lines may be reduced to their intersection.
 2.
 The ultimate interpretation nust be the same f̂ or both levels of resolution (at leait instancehierarchy related), hence the possibility sets may lie intersected across levels.
 Figure 2a depicts tv.
'i lines v/hich are kn<"'vii to correspond to a |>x:ific bloli Iv^cnusp of their im,ige h'orarchy tructiire.
 Also depicted *s a nrnlni pnssiliil ity set for oach olr>mr>nt.
 By applying rule blob (a,c,h| a,c,h line line line line line line (n,b,c,d| (a,b,c,e) (a,b,c) (a,b,c( |a,c| (a,c| (a) (b) (c) Figure 2; Three stages in the api^lication of consistency across resolution levels.
 (1) we eliminate (d,e|, and by applying rule (2) we arrivn at tlie final set of possible models |a,c| as slrr.
m in figure 2c.
 See Bravse (1931) for an example of the operation of these metliotJs in the bodyform domain.
 Tlie correspondences being utilized Ijy these metliods are only available in the limited area of the image which has been processed at the highest level of resolution (fovea), and the u]tim.
ate usefulness of such operations will lie influenced by the appropriateness of the selection of these locations by the program (lirowsp, 1980) .
 It also remains to establish coTi^utational advantages in the order of processing the local and global information (see Mavon, 1977; Kinchla andltolfe, 1979).
 V.
 GROUP PROCESSING AND MODEL irWnCATTC»'I Kahneman and llenik (1977) have formulated a "groupprocessing" model of the application of attention \Anch is similar to the application of constraining relation (1) of the previous section.
 Their model proposes a preattentive grouping operation which selects large sca^e obiects for subsequent analysis.
 Tlie experiments which demonstrate tlie validity of this mrxJel emplcff displays such as that of figure 3.
 4 3 6 2 8 1 4 3 6 2 8 (al (b) Figure 3.
 Group processing digit detection display One of the two displays such as shcsm in figure 3, is presented briefly and the task is to detect a specified target digit.
 The results shoiv that groups are processefl separately, but that processing is almost uniform within groups.
 |l,7,4| (4,8| w 12,4} (1,4| (a) Figure 4.
 resolutions.
 (b) Features available at two Assume that high resolution ''eature information is availa" •, and that for each such '"eature, a set of model possibilities is established (as shavn in figure 4a).
 Also assum" the availabiltv of coarse l'>'d 188 file:///Anchin''ormation which gives th« identification of larqer objects (figure 4h).
 Consider the following interpretation of these results: Tn the first stage, the globil obiects are detected, as are the high resolution features specifyirvg their model possibility sets.
 Ttieso s^ts can only he assigned, however, to the established objects, as depicted in ""igure 5.
 (1,4,7) {1,4,7| {4,8| {7.
2,6) (5,7,2,6) (8,3,2) 6 2 8 (6,8) (1,4) (6,3,8,5) f y V ^ (2,4) (6,8) (6,3,8,5) (6,3,8,5) Figure 5.
 low re.
solution objects detected and nodel possibilities assigned to high resolution features, whicli are roughly located.
 At this point, there are obviously too rany features associated with the object for it to be a single digit, so a subsequent breakdoim of objects takes place.
 Tn that this second phase is a higher resolution, it can only take place over a smaller area, so one of tlie two main objects is selected for more rletailed examination (see figure 6) .
 (1,7,4) ̂  (1,4)/^ (1,7,4) (4,8) 4 3 r *N (2,4) (1,4) (8,3,2) (6,3,8,5) Figure 6.
 Features assigned to dejects detected at a finer level of resolution, for one of the low level objects.
 A second examination of the possibility sets reveals that the required elements are available for only one digit in each of the defined positions, and hence their identities can be established in p3ranel, without serial application of attention to each of the specific locations.
 Feature integration theory proposes that object identification nay take place in piralle!, based on features alone, or serially based on conjunctions of features when necessary.
 The group processing results indicate intermediate steps at wĥ cli features are assigned to nbjf^^ts detecte<l at lo'̂ ; resolution, and once this assignment is complete, some model possibilities nay be discarde:! by using the constraining relation (1) from the previous section.
 Tlie location of obiects to wliich these features are attached will becom' more refined if necessary, to the point of either allowing olijsct identification through confirmation of the presence of the required elements alone, or if necessary by considering the relations ammg features.
 TTie identity of features miy be determined over a wide visual field, but without specific location.
 IrtMtion may br>come vmre specific through attachment to \cM resolution imaqe elements, but only over a more restricteil visual field.
 Finally, the actual location may he determined (o nermi t feTturp integration.
 Ttiis final locating action operates over a '•nvil 1 area of thp visual field, and therefore requires serial application if more than one location is to be searched.
 VI.
 StrWARY By adopting a scWenatabased approach, oonputational vision domains rmv be structured so as to use the conponent hierarchy as a meclianism for cu''ng the mrxlels to be invokel.
 Ttie corrplete exanination of the relations required by nodels can be conputationally expensive, and for human vision, presupposes the application of foveal attention.
 A mechanism has been described which permits the interaction between information from different levels of resolution by eliminating model possibilities and inposing groupings over high resolution features.
 This mechanism has been slxyvn to be useful in describing the relation between group processing phenomena and Feature Integration Theory.
 VII.
 REFERENCES Brcn/se, R.
A.
 1180.
 Mediation between central and peripheral orocesses: useful knowlerlge structures.
 PROC CSCSI3, Victoria, B.
C.
 pp.
166171.
 Browse, R.
A.
 1981.
 Interpretationbased interaction between levels of resolution.
 sulsmitted to TjrAI6, Vancouver B.
C.
, Aug 1981.
 Freuder, E.
C.
 1976.
 A conputer system for visual recognition using active knowledge, Ph.
D.
 thesis, AITR345, M.
T.
T.
, Cambridge, Mass.
, 1976.
 Havens, W.
S.
 1978.
 A procedural model for machine perception.
 Ph.
D.
 thesis, Thechnical reoort TR783, Department of Conputer Science, University of British Columliia.
 Havens, W.
S.
 and Mackworth, A.
K.
 1980.
 Schematabased understanding of handdrawn sketch maps.
 PROC CSCSI3, Victoria, B.
C.
 pp.
172178.
 Kahneman, D.
 and Ilenik, A.
 1977.
 Effects of visual grouping on iniiie<Uate recall and selective attention.
 in S.
 Dornic (ei1.
) Attention and Performance VI Hillsdale, N.
J.
 Lawrence Erlbaum.
 pp.
307332.
 Kinchla, R.
A.
 and (•Jolfe, J.
M.
 1979.
 The order of visual processing: "topdown", "bottoi>up", or "middleout".
 Perception and Psychophysics, 1979,25, pp.
 225231.
 Mackworth, A.
K.
 1977.
 Consistency in networks of Artificial Intelligence 8, pp.
99118.
 relations.
 M.
3ckv>orth, A.
K.
 1978.
 Vision research strategy: black magic, metaphors, mechanisms, miniworlds, and maps, in A.
R Hanson and E.
M.
 Riseman (e<ls.
) ,Conputer Vision Systems, Academic Press, 1978.
 pp.
5359.
 Navon, D.
 1977.
 Forest before trees: the precedence of global features in visual perception.
 Cognitive Psychology, 1977,,9.
 pp.
 353383.
 Rumelhart, D.
E.
 and Ortony, A.
 1976.
 The representation of knowledge in memory.
 Center for Huamn Information Processing report 55, University of California, San Diego.
 Jan 1976.
 Treisman, A.
, Seykes, M.
, and Gelade, G.
 1977.
 Selective attention and stimulus integration.
 in S.
 Dornic (ed.
) Attention and Performance VI Hillsdale, N.
J.
 r,awrence Erlbaum.
 pp.
 333361.
 189 Treismnn, A.
 anti nolarle, G.
 1980.
 A feature integration theory Cognitive Psychology 12 pp.
97136.
 of attention.
 TreisTvin, A.
 and Rchmiit, H.
 1931.
 Tlliî ôry cxjniunctions in the perception of objects, to appear.
 Waltz, D.
L.
 l'>72.
 Generating semantic der.
criptionr; from drawings of r.
cenos with shadows.
 Technical report ••1AC AITR271, M.
t.
T.
 , Caml^ridge, Mass.
 190 GROWING SCHEMAS OUT OF INTERVIEWS Jerry R.
 Hobbs (SRI International) and Michael H.
 Agar (Univ.
 of Maryland) Ethnography faces complex worlds with no explicit theory.
 AI, in contrast, carries complex formal theories Into encounters with simple worlds.
 Our work Is an effort to find a middleground, noting along the way the modifications in both fields required for a synthesis to occur.
 In this paper we report on our current version of this synthesis by analyzing a fragment of a life history interview with a career heroin addict.
 A core problem for ethnographic research is the management of large amounts of qualitative data whose form and content were primarily under infornant control.
 A particular tension In the analysis of this type of material lies in an ethnographer's desire to attend to detail while at the same time offerring more global statements about group life.
 In research over the last year with an extensive anthropological life history, we have tried different ways to resolve this tension.
 We would like to report on and demonstrate part of a proposed solution.
 The life history analyzed here was conducted over an eighteen month period with an older career heroin addict whom we call "Jack.
" At the time of the Interviews in the early 70's, Jack was about 60 years old, enrolled In a methadone progrm in New York City.
 The specific Interview used for this discussion centers around Jack's story of how he became a burglar.
 In other papers, we have looked at pieces of this Interview to develop our approach.
 Now we would like to take the interview as a whole to shew the Interaction between detailed microanalysis of a portion of text and the validation and enrichment of that analysis across the text as a whole.
 Eventually, we hope to use the approach to treat the entire life history.
 Our goal here is to tackle the issue of relating scheraas developed in the analysis of a small segment of text to the interview as a whole.
 We begin with an effort to get a sense of the overall organization of the interview.
 Our assumption Is that the Interview, analyzed as a completed act, can be seen as the expression of an Informant's plan.
 We make no assumption that the plan Is a representation of what the Informant "really" thought, nor do we assume that a plan was consciously worked out In detail before the interview.
 On the contrary, an earlier paper shows that viewing the completed Interview as an expression of a plan forces on us assumptions that highlight the creative emergence of Jack's story.
 At the same time, the planning view gives us a sense of the global coherence of the interview, a sense of how different pieces hang together to produce an understanding of the Interview as a whole.
 To get at these "pieces," we first do a highlevel segmentation of the Interview that makes cuts using major shifts in content as the guideline.
 Though this process is hardly foolproof, most of the spots for cuts seem Intuitively obvious.
 There Is an assumption here that members would mark major segment boundaries in the same way, but we have not tested it out.
 Further, the ease of segmenting is made easier still by the fact that we are working with data produced by another speaker of American English.
 At any rate, once the segments are marked, the problem Is to infer the plan of which they are Interrelated expressions.
 Some of the high level goals for an interview are in fact explicitly negotiated in the segments themselves.
 Where such explicit discussion Is not available, we are forced to Infer goals and subgoals whose interrelationships provide a coherent account of the interview as a whole.
 Like most students of phenomena—natural or human—we assume an implicit order that it is our task to bring to light.
 The results of the global analysis leave us with a sense of the major segments of the interview together with the goals ahd subgoals that show them to be coherently linked.
 The next step Is to pick a segment and look for coherence at a lower level—what we call local coherence.
 This" microanalysis" begins by specifying what it is that each utterance has to do with the ones that imnedlately precede and follow it.
 The analysis presupposes that we have a sense of utterance content, a presupposition that Is again facilitated here by working with another speaker of American English.
 The microanalysis In terms of local coherence forces us to specify the logical relations between utterances such that they are seen as copartlclpants in connected discourse.
 Hobbs has explored the adequacy of a fairly small number of relations to serve In this analysis.
 The coherence relations, which first organize the utterance by utterance structure in a segment, are then also used to show relations across groups of utterances in that same segment.
 The coherence relations, in short, are used to show us the ties amont the utterances within a segment.
 However, explicating the relationships forces on us the next step in the analysis.
 If two utterances are related because one "elaborates" on another, we must now make explicit the propositions that justify our claim.
 If two sequences of utterances In a segment are said to "contrast," we must now show the knowledge in terms of which that contrast can be seen.
 The local coherence analysis of a segment forces us to develop explicit Inferences that make sensible those relations.
 As will be seen shortly, some of these inferences bunch together through their Interlinked predicates and arguments.
 This "bunching" of Inferences, so characteristic of human knowledge, was the reason for the development of the notion of "schema" in AI and psychology.
 In short, our analysis in terms of local coherence leads us to construct schemas that justify that analysis.
 Now, schemas are of particular Interest to ethnographers, because they are potentially useful In understanding not Just the segment that motivated their construction, but other segments as well.
 Highlevel schemas that offer such understanding of a variety of acts have been a traditional goal of cultural anthropology, whether called "patterns," "themes," or "value orientations.
" However, ethnographers typically construct the high level schemas and demonstrate the resulting understanding in a coarsegrained way.
 It is this gap that the more detailed local coherence analysis can fill.
 At the same time, a local coherence analysis of every segment to which the schema Is applied would be too timeconsuming.
 To solve this problem in the sample analysis of one Interview presented here, we have developed the following strategy.
 We pick a particularly interesting schema from the mlcroanalyzed segment and set up some conditions under which it should apply to other segments.
 In the analysis done here, we are interested in the "arrest" schema, so we decide that any segment that concerns itself with Illegal acts will qualify.
 The "concern" might be reflected in a single utterance, or It might be the focus of an entire segment.
 It might be semantlcally encoded In the utterance, or it might be understood only through Inferences connected to that surface semantic content.
 The segments that satisfy these conditions are then examined for their schematic relevance.
 As we will show, this process leads to a richer understanding of the details of the schema, a better sense of its relation to other schemas, and validation through its use in understanding other segments of the Interview.
 However, the examination of the range of application of the schenia will not contain the detail of the microanalysis that produced it.
 We will stop the discussion at the point where we feel that the connection Is obvious.
 At the same time, there Is an 191 assumpClon that such a detailed analysis Is possible for each segment; in principle an analysis of local coherence could be done that would explicitly show the connections.
 In other words, we will trade off detail for breadth of coverage, without abandoning the obligation to fill in the detail should it be required.
 This careful use of different levels of description in different analytical contexts will, we hope, resolve the tension between detailed analysis and breadth of coverage.
 The strategy is hardly unique to our approach.
 Learning often works like this — the beginner attends to lowlevel detail, gradually builds higher level knowledge of what he is doing, and eventually develops a global sense of whatever he is learning and forgets the details unless some problem forces him to return to that level to solve it.
 We are simply trying to learn to understand an interview in a way that points to strategies for learning to understand even broader ranges of human action.
 In the presentation, we will begin by displaying the global plan of the burglary interview.
 Following that, we will show a microanalysis of a segment to demonstrate the construction of some schemas related to arrest.
 Then we will look at the schema as it thematically recurs in other segments of the interview and modify and enrich It.
 Finally, we will conclude with some thoughts on the potential of the method for wider application.
 192 SHAPING EXPLAHATIONS: Effects of questioning on text interpretation Richard H.
 Granger, Jr.
 Artificial'Intelligence Project Computer Science Department University of California Irvine, California 92717 ABSTRACT Results in cognitive psychology have shown that readers can be steered away from an otherwise plausible interpretation of a story by extratextual factors such as the source of the text, the stated reading purpose, interruptions and repetition of questions about the text.
 For instance, successive repetitions of the same question about a given text will often elicit a series of alternative interpretations of the text.
 This effect cannot be accounted for by established principles of text processing behavior, such as people's preference for cohesive and parsimonious representations of text.
 This paper presents a computer program called MACARTHUR, which models this behavior by varying the depth and direction of its inference pursuit in response to requestioning, resulting in a series of markedly different interpretations of the same text.
 In light of the results, some new experiments are suggested in hopes of arriving at a new principle, beyond cohesion and parsimony, to account for the observed text processing behavior.
 1.
0 INTRODUCTION told that it was excerpted from the New York Times, an Agatha Christie novel.
 Cosmopolitan magazine, a grammarschool history textbook or a Jimmy Stewart movie.
 Their interpretations of the text varied significantly depending on the stated text source.
 These observations about people's reading behavior agree with experiments in cognitive psychology in which varying the stated reading purpose (e.
g.
.
 Black [1980], Frederiksen [1975]), and interposing questions about the text (e.
g.
, Rothkopf and Bisbicos [1967], Anderson and Biddle [1975]) resulted in differences in inferences made by the readers, as evidenced by tests for false recognition of statements corresponding to inferences from the text.
 This paper presents a program called MACARTHUR which is able to redirect its own inference processes when a question about a text is reasked repeatedly.
 MACARTHUR demonstrates its successive interpretations by generating English answers to questions about the text.
 For example, after reading a version of the above story [1], MACARTHUR responds in English to the following sequence of questions: Q) Why did the ambassador go to Albania? A) HE WENT ON A VACATION IN ALBANIA AND PAKISTAN.
 Q) Are you sure? Why did he go to Albania? A) MAYBE HE WANTED TO MEET WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF ALBANIA, BUT HE WANTED TO KEEP IT A SECRET.
 Consider the following story: [1] The Pakistani Ambassador to the United States made an unscheduled stop in Albania yesterday on his way home to what an aide of the Ambassador described as "a working vacation".
 Why did the ambassador go to Albania? People in informal experiments most often answer that he may have simply gone there as part of his vacation.
 However, when the same question is repeated, they generate alternative explanations, such as the following: 1.
 There could have been some secret political meeting there.
 2.
 There might have been plane trouble; say, an emergency landing to fix a fuel leak.
 3.
 Maybe he just wanted to avoid reporters on his vacation.
 The text presents an explanation on the surface (that the ambassador was on vacation), which is adequate to serve as an interpretation of the events in the story.
 However, readers can be steered away from this explanation by external factors such as repetition of the same question.
 In a related series of informal experiments, people were told different "sources" of the text; in particular, they were either Most existing text understanding systems (e.
g.
, CuUingford [1978], Wilensky [1978], DeJong [1979], Charniak [1978]) do not account for people's ability to make different inferences depending on external factors such as reprobing.
 MACARTHUR's ability to redirect its own inferences arises from a new classification scheme for explanations based on an attribute termed the "shape" of an explanation.
 The program is intended to provide a testbed for comparing implementations of our theories about people's reading behavior with actual experimental evidence.
 Towards this end, the concluding section of this paper proposes some possible new experiments, and some possible extensions to MACARTHUR.
 2.
0 BACKGROUND: COHESION AND PARSIMONY 2.
1 The cohesion principle Results in cognitive psychology have shown that people almost universally construct interpretations of text which serve to coherently connect the separate statements in a text, even when such connections are not at all obvious.
 For instance, Haberlandt and Bingham [1978] have found evidence for causal connective inferences being made among the sentences in examples like the following: [2] Brian punched George.
 George called the doctor.
 The doctor arrived.
 193 [3] Brian punched George.
 George liked the doctor.
 The doctor arrived.
 Subjects took longer to read [31 than [2], presumably spending the extra time trying to infer causal or intentional connective inferences among the statements in the text.
 Similarly, Bower, Black and Turner [1979] found that reading times were longer when readers had to perform more than one inferential "step" to establish a causal connection between two statements in a narrative.
 These results and others providing evidence for spatial, instrumental, referential, causal and intentional connective inference have demonstrated that a crucial feature of human text understanding is the ability to construct a connected and coherent representation of a text.
 Taken together, these results form what we may term the "cohesion principle" of text processing behavior.
 Researchers in AI have constructed a number of process models of text understanding which are consistent with the cohesion principle.
 AI programs that have addressed the problem of connectedness in texts include the MARGIE program (Schank [19751) in terms of causal connections, the SAM and Ms.
Malaprop programs in terms of script and framebased connections (Schank et al (19751, Cullingford [19781, Charniak [19791), and the PAM and BELIEVER programs in terms of intentional connections (Schank and Abelson [19771, Wilensky [19781, Sridharan and Schmidt [1978]).
 2.
2 The parsimony principle The cohesion principle alone is not sufficient to account for people's interpretations of text.
 For instance, consider the following deceptively simple example (from Granger [1980]): [4] Mary picked up a magazine.
 She swatted a fly.
 When asked why Mary picked up the magazine, people in informal experiments overwhelmingly answer that she picked it up with the intention of swatting the fly.
 However, this answer corresponds to only one of (at least) three possible interpretations of the text, none of which can be ruled out on grounds of logic or the cohesion principle: (4a) Mary picked up a magazine to read it.
 She then was annoyed by a fly, and she swatted it with the magazine she was holding, (4b) Mary picked up a magazine to read it.
 She then was annoyed by a fly, and she swatted it with a flyswatter that was handy.
 (4c) Mary picked up a magazine to swat a fly with it.
 This same phenomenon occurs in any "garden path" text; i.
e.
, a text that suggests an initially plausible inference which turns out to be "supplanted" (Granger [1980]) in the final representation.
 To account for these observations.
 Granger proposed the Parsimony Principle, which states that the preferred interpretation of a text is the one in which the fewest number of inferred intentions of a etory character account for the maximum number of his actions.
 This principle has been incorporated into a computer program called ARTHUR (A Reader THat Understands Reflectively), which can supplant its own initial inferences in light of subsequent information in a text, thereby enabling it to read garden path stories.
 3.
0 THE SHAPE OF EXPLANATIONS The cohesion and parsimony principles together still fail to account deterministically for certain text understanding behavior.
 In particular, people's ability to generate alternative interpretations of a text in response to requestioning cannot be explained by these principles, since, for example, all four of the interpretations given earlier in this paper for story [1] are coherent and parsimonious.
 In order to account for this behavior, we have developed a classification scheme for alternative explanations based on an attribute of explanations we term their "shape".
 This scheme has proven useful in the explanationselection algorithm used by MACARTHUR in generating alternative interpretations of a text.
 Following is a list of the four shapes MACARTHUR currently knows about.
 This is not intended to be a complete list, it simply reflects the present state of our analysis: 1.
 Pursuedesiredstate: This refers to simple goal pursuit, i.
e.
 a story in which a character has a goal and performs plans in service of that goal.
 2.
 Avoidundesiredstate: A character may not have a specific goal or desired state, but rather is acting out plans that are in service of the avoidance of a particular undesired state, such as sleepiness (for which a remedy is to ingest coffee or other stimulants), hunger (remedies include doing something distracting like reading, or taking diet pills, or even going to sleep), etc.
 3.
 Accidentreaction: A character may be involved in some events that unintentionally hinder his goals.
 The character's subsequent actions may include attempts to investigate the cause of the accident; overcoming the accident by replanning and reacting; abandoning or postponing the goal; or simply trying again.
 4.
 Coverstories: A character may have a goal that he wishes to achieve secretly.
 If he cannot simply avoid being observed, then he may construct a "cover story"; i.
e.
, an alternative connected explanation for his actions which can serve as an "alibi" to any observers.
 Complete understanding of such stories involves the ability to maintain separate belief spaces for different characters, and to recognize deception via conflicting beliefs held by different characters .
 194 Following is an illustration of how these explanation shapes can give rise to a series of alternative interpretations of stories.
 Recall story [11: [1] The Pakistani Ambassador to the United States made an unscheduled stop in Albania yesterday on his way home to what an aide of the Ambassador described as "a working vacation".
 The four alternative explanations previously given for this story can now be categorized by explanation shape: 1.
 He may have gone there as part of his vacation.
 (PURSUEDESIREDSTATE) 2.
 There could have been some secret political meeting there.
 (COVERSTORY) 3.
 There might have been plane trouble; say an emergency landing.
 (ACCIDENTREACTION) 4.
 Maybe he just wanted to avoid reporters on his vacation.
 (AVOIDUNDESIRABLESTATE) Consider story [5], another story that MACARTHUR can process (see Granger [1981] for examples of detailed output from MACARTHUR): [5] Dr.
 Fitzsimmons yawned loudly.
 He left Carney and Samuelson and went into the next room.
 He opened the refrigerator.
 Following are four differentlyshaped explanations for this story.
 1.
 Maybe he wanted to make some warm milk to help him get to sleep.
 (PURSUEDESIREDSTATE) 2.
 Maybe he wanted to make some coffee to help him stay awake.
 (AVOIDUNDESIRABLESTATE) 3.
 Maybe he heard something fall down in there and he went to investigate.
 (ACCIDENTREACTION) 4.
 Maybe he actually had some secret reason for going in there, so he yawned to pretend he was tired.
 (COVERSTORY) The actual results of the experiment indicated that the memory task caused the most false recognitions of inference items, while the essay task came second and the comprehensibility task came lowest, as expected.
 A posthoc analysis of the recognition test items revealed that the essay task caused significantly more false recognitions than the other two groups on inference items which were "related to the main point" of the story, even though the number of false recognitions overall (i.
e.
, including items both related and unrelated to the main point) was lower for the essay task than for the memory task.
 In other words, the experiment was looking for a monotonically increasing effect of more inferences corresponding to "deeper" processing.
 However, what it found was a difference in not only the "depth", but also in the "direction" of inferences generated.
 In particular.
 Black acknowledges the existence of "mainpoint oriented" processing in the essay task which did not appear in the other two tasks.
 Consider a similar set of experiments based on more difficult stories, i.
e.
, stories that are less strongly connected to a single main point than the essays used in Black's study.
 For example, nonstraightforward texts like [1] and [5] in this paper could be used.
 According to the cohesion principle, readers tend to work at finding connections among sentences in a text, even when such connections are not obvious.
 Hence, we predict that subjects would dutifully generate connective inferences to explain the sentences in these nonstraightforward texts.
 However, since there are a number of different alternative interpretations for these texts, different explanations might be produced by different subjects, perhaps as a function of different types of external factors such as reading purpose, text source, interposed questions and reprobing.
 For example, in a readingpurpose experiment the "shallower" readers might generate a "naive" interpretation of a difficult text; while deeper readers might generate not just more inferences but different inferences, corresponding to their significantly different interpretation of the text.
 We propose such a set of experiments, designed around nonstraightforward texts, and making use of other types of extratextual factors than just reading purpose; in particular, the effects of interposed questions and reprobing.
 4.
0 CONCLUSIONS: PROPOSED EXPERIMENTS Black's [1980] experiments on the effects of reading purpose on memory for text assumed that the task of rating the comprehensibility of a text was "a 'shallow' task", preparing for a memory test was "a 'deeper' task", and preparing for an essay test in which the subjects would have to make use of the main point of the text was "a 'deepest' task" [p.
 20].
 Black's initial prediction was basically that the "deeper" the reading purpose, the greater the number of inferences the subject would produce, as evidenced by the number of false recognitions exhibited on tested inference items.
 REFERENCES [1] Anderson, R.
C.
 and Biddle, W.
B.
 (1975) On asking people questions about what they are reading.
 In G.
 H.
 Bower (Ed.
) The psycholoKV of learning and motivation.
 Vol 9.
 Academic Press, New York.
 [2] Black, J.
 (1980).
 The Effects of Reading Purpose on Memory for Text.
 Cognitive Science TR #7, Yale University, New Haven, Conn.
 195 [31 Black, J.
 and Bern.
H.
 (1980).
 Causal Coherence and Memory for Events in Narratives.
 Cognitive Science TR #3, Yale University, New Haven, Conn.
 [4] Bower, G.
H.
, Black, J.
B.
 and Turner,!.
 (1979).
 Scripts in memory for text.
.
 CoRnitive Psychology.
 H.
, 177220.
 [5] Charniak, E.
 (1978).
 On the use of framed knowledge in language comprehension.
 Computer Science TR #137, Yale University, New Haven, Conn.
 [6] Cullingford.
 R.
 (1978).
 Script Application: Computer Understanding of Newspaper Stories.
 Ph.
D.
 Thesis, Yale University, New Haven, Conn.
 [7] Frederiksen.
 C.
H.
 (1975).
 Effects of contextinduced processing operations on semantic information acquired from discourse.
 Cognitive Psychology.
 ]_, p.
 371A58.
 [8] Granger, R.
 (1980).
 When Expectation Fails: Towards â  selfcorrecting inference system.
 Proceedings of the First National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Stanford, Cal.
 [9j Granger, R.
 (1981).
 Directing and Redirecting Inference Pursuit: ExtraTextual Effects on Text Interpretation.
 Technical Report if 171, Computer Science Dept.
 , University of California, Irvine, Cal.
 Submitted to the 7th IJCAI, Vancouver.
 [10] Haberlandt.
 K.
 and Bingham, G.
 (1978).
 Verbs contribute to the coherence of brief narratives: Reading related and unrelated sentence triples.
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Behavior.
 17.
 p.
 419425.
 [11] Rothkopf, E.
Z.
 and Bisbicos, E.
 (1967).
 Selective facilitative effects of interspersed questions on learning from written material.
 Journal of Educational Psychology.
 58.
 p.
 5661.
 [12] Schank, R.
 C.
 (1975).
 Conceptual Information Processing, NorthHolland, Amsterdam.
 [13] Schank, R.
 C.
 and Abelson, R.
 P.
 (1977).
 Scripts.
 Plans.
 Goals and Understanding.
 Erlbaum Press, Hillsdale, N.
J.
 [14] Sridharan,N.
S.
 and Schmidt,C.
F.
 (1978).
 Knowledgedirected inference in BELIEVER.
 In Waterman & HayesRoth (Eds.
), PatternDirected Inference Systems, Academic Press, N.
Y.
 [15] Wilensky, R.
 (1978).
 Understanding Goalbased Stories.
 Ph.
D.
 Thesis, Yale University, New Haven, Conn.
 196 The Need for Context in Event Identity John M.
 Morris U Proctor Avenue Clinton, New York The problem of event identity is the problem of determining whether two sentences describe the same event.
 Recent discussions hav; suggested two possible criteria for determining event identity; (1) identical times, objects, and constituent properties; and (2) identical causes and effects.
 Both approaches can be shown to be subject to fatal exceptions.
 In everyday life, however, we have little trouble in determining what specific criteria would be relevant to determining event identity.
 I want to show that such criteria are heavily contextdependent, suggesting that event identity cannot be determined without consideration of the context in which the event occurs.
 Here are some excimples of the ways in which one event may be said to be identical to another: A.
 Logical Entailment Al.
 The plane flew over the UN Building, and the UN Building is in New York.
 A2.
 The plane flew over Nev; York.
 B.
 Definitional Bl.
 Carol forced open the window, reached through the window, and removed the depressionglass vase, with the intention of appropriating it to her own use.
 B2.
 Carol committed the crime of unlawful entry.
 C.
 Conventional CI.
 He shouted "Au secours.
" C2.
 He cried for help.
 D.
 Causal Dl.
 She struck her leg sharply against the fence rail.
 D2.
 She broke her leg.
 E.
 Accidental El.
 A hero of the Resistance was elected French president.
 E2.
 A man with a big nose was elected French president.
 F.
 Psychoanalytical Fl.
 A child dreamed of a dragon.
 F2.
 A child dreamed of her father.
 G.
 Theoretical Gl.
 The water boiled.
 C,2.
 The molecules moved rapidly.
 H.
 Epistemic HI.
 Spring is coming.
 H2.
 Days are getting longer.
 There is nothi about this set of welcome to expand, otherwise mutilate important fact abo that it illustrate which two sentence the sane event occ ng particularly sacred categories, and you are contract, modify, or the list at will.
 The ut the list is simply s the variety of ways in s can both assert that urred.
 The logical entailment in Category A is, of course, rather loose, but the point is simply that (given appropriate background knowledge) Al provides completely conclusive evidence for A2; one cannot deny A2 without (implicitly) denying Al.
 We know this because we know the meaning of such words as "flies" and "over"; no searches for empirical evidence could possibly substitute for this elementary understanding.
 In category B, Definitional, the meaning is scarcely part of our everyday knowledge of the language, but requires a search through a legal dictionary.
 To say tliat Carol committed the crime is to say that she performed a certain set of acts, and it is one of the purposes of the law to define these acts as precisely as possible.
 Notice in particular that Carol's reaching through the window and appropriating the vase was not a different event from her committing the crime.
 Me should scarcely want to say that she committed the crime and also reached through the window.
 Instead, what we say is that she committed the crime in reaching (or b^ reaching) through the window, where the reaching occurred within a particular context of property ownership and malicious intent.
 The criteria that identify the event as a crime are part of the context in whicli it occurs.
 The next category, Category C, is full of interest for the philosophy of language, and I will only hint at it here.
 Suppose that at a private beach, a drowning person shouts "Au secours!" The lifeguard, not understanding, fails to respond.
 The bereaved family sues the beach, on the ground that the guard failed to perform his obvious duty.
 Let us suppose that the case resolves itself to the issue of whether the man did or did not call for help.
 Under what conditions would we decide for the lifeguard or for the family? The problem is (I think) extremely difficult and interesting, but it is not the sort of problem that can be solved by looking in the dictionary or by gathering evidence; it depends on ho\i the language is to be used.
 Category D is called "Causal," and I have included this example simply to show that causes are not always prior in time to their effects.
 She has broken her leg in the very act of hitting it against the fence rail; she did not hit the rail and then break her leg.
 Nevertlieless, if asked, she would be likely to say, "I broke my leg bv hitting it against the fence rail.
" (She certainly would not 197 say, "I hit my leg by breaking it.
") Yet there is nothing to distinguish the hittingevent from the breakingevent; they are the same event as seen in two different ways.
 Another category of interest.
 Category E, Accidental, shows the importance of context in determining how an event will be described.
 A reasonably patriotic French historian would surely choose Kl over E2 as a way of describing a certain French election.
 For the historian, nl might be expected to function in an interesting way in the formulation of various generalizations about voting behavior.
 This historian might wish to formulate some general rule on the way in which former heroes tend to win elections.
 The description E2, however, seems totally devoid of interest for the historian, since it is unlikely that any generalization of the slightest historical interest can be derived from it.
 On the other hand, we might imagine an overly selfconscious person with a large nose, who is preparing a history of the famous largenosed people of the v;orld, and who imagines that this election has elevated the status of bignosed people everywhere.
 For such a person, description E2 is of tlie greatest importance.
 But surely El describes the same event as E2.
 DeGaulle was a hero of the Resistance, and he was also a man with a big nose; he was not two persons.
 It was precisely the same election that elevated the hero and the bignosed man; El does not describe a different election from that described by E2.
 In fact, the most useful way of characterizing the relationship between El and E2 is simply to say that they both describe the same event.
 The following objection lies at the center of our problem, and it illustrates the confusion with which the problem has been enveloped.
 It will be objected that the consequences of El are obviously different from the consequences of E2.
 IVhat sort of consequences might we have in mind? The consequences of El would be those of electing a hero — a surge of patriotism, resentment on the part of antiwar factions, and increase in the influence of the military forces.
 The consequences of E2 would obviously be quite different — derision from unfriendly foreign powers, jubilation among political cartoonists, renewed literary interest in Cyrano de Dergerac.
 Yet the two events are one, because DeGaulle was just one person.
 The identity in Category F suggests simply that a psychoanalyticallyinclined interpreter might wish to say of the child that she was "really" dreaming of her father.
 The meaning of "really" will, of course, depend on how we interpret the claims of psychoanalysts and others who believe that our dreams are symbolic of our waking life.
 In the pair of examples Gl and 02, the boiling of the water was said to be identical with the movements of its molecules.
 The type of identity suggests is what I will call "physical" identity, since we would scarcely want to say that the boiling of a pan of water was a different event from the rapid movement of its molecules.
 At the same time, the context in which a cook is watching the pan of water, to determine when to add the noodles, is quite different from the context in which an early physicist might have watched it, to determine the local turbulence that reveals the molecular agitation.
 Thus tlie event in the physicist's context is conceptually quite different from the event in the cook's context.
 The goal of the seventeenthcentury physicist was to establish that the boiling event (as observed by the cook) was identical to the molecularagitation event (as predicted by the theory).
 Since the latter event could not be observed directly, it was necessary to develop techniques for inferring the molecular motions from observable events, such as local turbulence in the water.
 The reason for doing so was that a great many interesting consequences could be derived from the general theory of molecular motions, which could not be derived from the cook's account.
 We may say, then, that boiling is physically identical with molecular agitation, but that it is conceptually different from it.
 This distinction is one wliich points a way to a solution.
 Category H, Epistemic, contains an interesting type of identity which could not conveniently be fitted into any of the others.
 We know that spring is coming, in the same way that we know that the days are getting longer — by looking at the calendar or by timing the sunsets.
 Evidence for HI is tlie same as evidence for 112.
 But there is no simple way in which HI can be said to imply H2, or viceversa.
 There seems to be no logical relationship between them, as there is between Al and A2.
 At the same time, we could hardly say that the approach of spring is different from the lengthening of days; HI and H2 represent two ways of looking at the same set of happenings.
 Thus we have eight different ways of determining the identity of eight different sorts of events.
 How much do they have in common? I want to give a brief answer to a complex question, with the assurance that a great deal remains to be said.
 An event — like a thing or an item — is defined within a given context of discourse.
 We count the items on my booktiielf in one way if we are book dealers, in other ways if we are wastepaper collectors or interior decorators.
 We count the things 198 in a field in one way if we are farmers, emother way if we are botanists.
 Similarly, we count events in one way if we are interested in aircraft flights, another way if we are concerned with noise polution or destruction of the ozone layer.
 Puzzles occur when we cross the boundaries that separate contexts — when Eleanor suddenly discovers that the intruder at whom she's been aiming the pistol is really her husband.
 The event — his coming into the room unannounced — is an intrusion in one context, a homecoming in another.
 Was his entry into the room one event or two? In some sense, it seems possible to say that it was both.
 Conside Jl.
 J2.
 J3.
 J4.
 r: R T A 7 3̂ C c T In Jl, the center symbol is unambiguously an "A".
 In J2, the "O" is a figure in which ambiguity depends on whether it is interpreted as a numeral or as a letter.
 When we read leftright, it is a zero; when we read topdown, it is an oh.
 In J3, the center figure is either one letter or two numerals, and again the ambiguity is resolved as we read topdown or leftright.
 In J4, the center symbol is hopelessly ambiguous in isolation.
 It can be either an "A" or an "I!".
 Ambiguity is resolveci as we read topdown or leftright.
 We can say that "A" (i.
e.
 the token) in Jl is the same letter (i.
e.
 the same token of the letter "A") whether read topdown or leftright; in either word, the center "A" is numerically identical with the center "A" of the other.
 But in J2, it seems strange to say, analogously, that the central numeral "0" is identical with the letter "0", since a numeral is not the same as n letter.
 The puzzle is not a paradox, however, since we can resolve it by saying something like: "The letter '0' has the same shape as the numeral '0'.
" (I do not mean to claim that this is really a very satisfactory resolution of the puzzle; I want only to emphasize that there must be some way of resolving it.
) In J3, the situation seems a little stranger, since one letter appears to be identical to two numerals.
 Finally, in J4, a token of a letter which we identify as an "A" is identical to a token of a letter when we cnll an "!!", yet we do not v/ant to say that an "A" is identical with an "H".
 By insisting that various kinds of identity must be separated out, I have tried to suggest that the problem of event identity is not as difficult as it appeared at first.
 This approach means that the very nature of an event depends on the context in which it occurs (just as the shape 17 nay be either a "B" or a "13", depending on its context).
 One way of emphasizing the contextdependency of events is to consider nonevents — that is, those occasions on which an event fails to occur.
 The watchman fails to make his rounds.
 The bridegroom does not make it to the altar.
 There is (I think) a scene in Chekhov in which the young man has been expected to propose to the daughter.
 His proposal is extremely important to tlie family, because it promises them a way out of their poverty and debts, thanks to his money and status.
 He appears at their home, and he plays cards with the family.
 This is the only event that happens on the stage — the actors play a perfectly ordinary game of cards.
 But the family — and the audience — know that he has failed to propose.
 His failure, his cowardice at the crucial moment, means bankruptcy and disgrace for the family, and it is this knowledge that gives the scene its emotional significance.
 But a nonevent like this is literally nothing.
 No relevant physical events occur; yet (in another sense) a disaster has occurred for the family.
 The nonevent is like the null set, in that it cannot be distinguished from any other nonevent, if they are considered out of context.
 A small blank area on a sheet of paper may be physically identical with that same blank area when the paper is filled with writing; but it will serve different functions, depending on where the blank space occurs in that writing.
 The context makes all the difference.
 In the series of stories and analogies that I have presented here, I have suggested that ordinary people have roughandready ways of answering questions about event identity, and that we can make some operational sense out of their roughandready methods.
 The primary method that I have recommended is to draw a sharp distinction between physical identity and conceptual identity, rather than treating event identity as though it were a single type of identity.
 I have also suggested that conceptual identity will depend on the context in which the event occurs.
 REFERENCES Donald Davidson, "Actions, Reasons, and Causes," Journal of Philosophy, Nov.
 7, 1963, pp.
 685700.
 Jawgwon Kim, "Causation, Nomic Subsumption, and the Concept of Event," Journal of Philosophy, Apr.
 26, 1973, pp.
 217236.
 John M.
 tlorris, "NonEvents," Philosophical Studies, 1978.
 199 Point of View In Problem SolvlnR Edwin L.
 Hutchlns James A.
 Levin Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition University of California.
 San Diego Problem solvers adopt "points of view" when solving problems, expressed through the delxis of their verbalizations, that are strongly related both to the commission of Illegal moves and to the occurrence of blocked conditions.
 This paper describes an analysis of point of view in the Missionaries & Cannibals task, and presents a model for problem solving that Incorporates point of view as a resource allocation mechanism useful for dealing with the the finite capacity of human problem solving processing.
 This analysis relates the subjects' actions in this task to their talk about these actions.
 When solving a problem, where do people put themselves? After solving a simple puzzle (the Missionaries & Cannibals task), all of our subjects reported having taken a "bird's eye view", looking down on the puzzle elements from above.
 Yet their verbal reports of puzzle actions were in terms of motion relative to their own positions, thus placing the problem solvers within the local space of the problem elements rather than removed from it.
 The English language permits a speaker to describe motion in space relative to his/her own position (or relative to other spatial landmarks).
 This problem solving "point of view" shifts over the course of solving the problem.
 More importantly, a person's point of view is related to progress in solving the problem.
 The analysis of what people say while solving problems has played an important role in problem solving research.
 There has been controversy over the status of what people say about what they are doing.
 At one end of a spectrum, the manifest content of problem solving "protocols'" is taken as an accurate reflection of a subset of problem solving processes (Newell i Simon, 1972).
 At the other end of the spectrum, this kind of talk about action has been rejected as valid data (Nlsbitt & Wilson, 1977).
 In this paper we take a position that neither assumes a simple link nor dismisses talk but instead closely looks at what the relation is.
 A detailed examination of the talk about actions in solving a simple puzzle reveals a systematic relation of which the subjects themselves (and previous researchers studying this puzzle) are not consciously aware.
 This relation can serve as an important building block of a model of problem solving that encompasses both talk and task actions.
 In our experiments, the subjects sat facing the experimenter with the puzzle pieces on a table between them.
 The puzzle pieces consisted of a piece of paper with a river drawn on it, three tokens labeled with Ms to stand for missionaries, three tokens labeled with Cs to stand for the cannibals, and a paper boat that would hold a maximum of two tokens.
 The object of the Missionaries & Cannibals puzzle Is to get all the people across the river using the boat, without ever having more cannibals on a side than missionaries.
 In all cases, the verbal interaction between the experimenter and the subject was tape recorded.
 Point of View The subjects represent the spatial aspect of the problem in their accounts primarily through the use of deictic verbs (come, go, take, send, bring, etc) and place adverbs (here, there, across, etc).
 The use of these lexical items positions the speaker relative to a spatial field.
 For example, one subject began the task with the following statement: "I want one cannibal and one missionary, and they go to the other side, and the guy drops off the cannibal and the missionary comes back again.
" The condition which has to be met in order for "go" to be appropriate is that the speaker is not at the goal of the action at the time of the utterance (Fillmore, 197A; Clark & Garnlca, 1974).
 For the verb "come" on the other hand, the condition which must be met is that the speaker is at the goal of the action.
 In this case we therefore assume that the subject has an implicit point of view on the problem which places him on the start shore throughout the two moves described.
 Another subject started the task with the next statement: "First thing I want to do is get a cannibal over to the other side.
 Let's take him over there with a missionary.
 Missionary takes the boat back.
" In this case the problem solver has expressed a shifting point of view.
 At the outset, the subjective point of view of the problem solver is at the start shore.
 This is shown both by the fact that the verb "take" indicates that the subject is not at the goal of the action at the time of the utterance and by the reference to the goal side of the river as 'the other side.
' In the course of the move the point of view changes to the goal shore as the problem solver travels with the creatures in taking them to the other side.
 The point of view of the problem solver remains at the goal shore through the execution of the next move.
 This is indicated by the delxis of the phrase 'Missionary takes' which again places the subject on the shore of the origin of the action rather than at the goal of the action.
 In previous approaches, (Thomas, 1974; Greeno, 1974; Jeffries, Poison, Razran, & Atwood, 1977) the subject was notified immediately upon the production of an Illegal state.
 In the procedure employed here.
 Illegal states were noted by the experimenter, but the subject was not told that an Illegal state had been produced until a following move was attempted.
 This provided the subject with an opportunity to self detect illegal states.
 If the subject failed to notice an Illegal state, it was pointed out by the experimenter when the next move was attempted.
 This procedure permits us to distinguish illegal states that are selfdetected by the subject from those that go unnoticed by the subject.
 200 Any move can be classified In terms of Its actual legality and Its Judged legality.
 This classification Is shown In the two by two table below.
 JUDGED legal Illegal legal ACTUAL I LEGAL MOVE I I Illegal I L ILLEGAL MOVE I BLOCKED I CONDITION I CORRECT I REJECTION I Errors of commission Legal moves do not have sldedness in the same way that Illegal moves do.
 As noted above, an Illegal state results from a rule violation that Is located on one side of the river or the other.
 When there Is no rule violation, there Is no sldedness.
 However, these moves are still amenable to point of view analysis.
 Novice problem solvers are sometimes blocked several times at the same state before sucessfully getting through it.
 These several passes through the same state may show changes In point of view.
 A particular point of view on the problem may lead the subject to discard a legal move, while a different point of view on the same state may make the legality of the next move obvious.
 Of these types of moves, the analysis of moves that produce actual Illegal states is the most straightforward, so we will begin with It.
 Since an Illegal state Is produced when the cannibals outnumber the missionaries on either side of the river, and since they cannot simultaneously outnumber them on both sides.
 Illegal states have a sldedness relative to the river.
 Where it Is possible to determine the subject's point of view at the time of the Illegal move, the Illegal state can be labeled a near side illegal state or a far side illegal state.
 Near side Illegal states are those in which the rule violation occurs on the same side of the river as the subject's current point of view.
 Far side Illegal states are those in which the rule violation occurs on the side of the river away from the subject's current point of view.
 The results of this analysis is shown in Table 2.
 Of the 15 illegal moves for which it was possible to assign an unambiguous point of view, 10 occured on the river bank away from the point of view of the subject, while only 5 occured on the river bank of the subject's point of view.
 Further, four of five near side Illegal moves were detected by the subject before making another move, while eight of ten far side illegal moves went undetected by the subject.
 Violation side Near Far Detected | by subjects 1 1 Undetected | by subjectsi A I 1 1 Total 1 5 1 2 1 8 1 10 1 Errors of Omission The analysis of errors in problem solving has largely focused on errors of commission, the Illegal moves that subjects make.
 However, a "problem" is not Just a situation where a person makes illegal moves.
 It may also be a situation where a person is unable to progress toward some goal, even after repreated attempts.
 This situation can be caused by "errors of omission", where the person fails to make a progressive move, as well as by the commission of Illegal moves.
 Early research on problem solving, especially that by the Gestalt psychologists, focussed on obstacles to achieving goals.
 For example, some of the early work by Kohler (1925) looked at how various organisms dealt with a physical block, a wire mesh fence between the organism and some food.
 How can we characterize the condition of being blocked? Kohler's animals were blocked when they made repeated attempts to get to the goal, none of which made progress toward the goal.
 These nonprogressive moves included backing away from the fence and running into the fence.
 By analogy, we can extend this criterion for being blocked into a more abstract task such as the Missionaries and Cannibals puzzle.
 A subject is blocked in a state when s/he makes at least two nonprogressive moves out of that state with no intervening progressive move from that state.
 With this definition of a "blocked condition, we identified fourteen instances in our data across the three experiments.
 In four Instances, the subject expressed a definite "point of view" for both the first move taken when blocked and then the first progressive move that broke through the block.
 In all four cases, the point of view expressed when blocked was different than when not blocked.
 Toward An Activation Model of Problem Solving We have been developing a dynamic interactive model of problem solving, based on an activation framework for cognitive processing (Levin, 1976, 1981).
 Within this framework, the current state of the problem solving is modelled by the current set of activations of concepts in the problem solver's long term memory.
 Each activation Influences other activations, increasing or decreasing the salience of its neighbors.
 Processing resource in this framework is directly captured by the salience metric, as highly salient activations have a large influence on the global result of processing, and activations that lose salience disappear from the scene.
 More salient activations of concepts are more likely to have effect than less salient contradictory activations.
 In this model, possible moves in a problem are activated by their pre and postcondition states.
 The current state of the problem will be strongly activated by perception, and actions for which the current state is a precondition will thus be salient.
 Postconditions that are 201 similar to the goal state are also more salient.
 Postconditions that are "Illegal" are Inhibited by the constraint concepts.
 The Interaction between current state, goals, and constraints creates a dynamic set of activated moves with differing relative saliences.
 Point of view, in this framework, is a salience allocation mechanism, contributing salience to the activations associated with the location of the problem solver's dlectlc position.
 The likelihood of an Illegal move resulting from a violation of a constraint Is Inversely related to the salience of the constraint activation on the side where the error occurs.
 Illegal Moves.
 Illegal moves are, in this framework, more likely to occur on the "far" side (away from the point of view position of the solver), since those constraints are less salient than "near side" constraints.
 In addition, detection of an illegal move once made is more likely when the constraint concepts are more salient • Blocked conditions.
 A blocked condition results when the progressive move In a situation Is less salient than alternative moves.
 In the simplest case, the progressive move never acquires enough salience to be activated at all.
 In this case, the problem solver Is totally "unaware" of the progressive move.
 In a more complicated case, the progressive move is considered, but not taken because it is less salient than alternative moves.
 A change In point of view may shift the relative saliences of the various simultaneously active alternative moves, and thus can lead to the solver selecting the previously rejected move, surmounting the roadblock to progress.
 The appearance of point of /lew In problem solving protocols and its apparent relation to problem solving processing casts new light on the relation of verbal protocols to the processing they describe.
 Much of the processing that goes into our problem solving Is transparent to the solver.
 That Is, we do it and are not aware that we have done it.
 In the case of point of view, we not only do it, we speak about it as well, and still we are not aware that we have done so.
 In fact one could (and many have) read the protocols many times and never notice the use of deixis.
 These transparent processes are important in our problems solving, but they are mercifully Invisible to us.
 Were they continually in consciousness, we would surely become confused.
 In analysis, we have the luxury of being able to examine both what is being done and how It is being done.
 In the phenomenon of point of view in problem solving, we see an aspect of the problem solving processing finding expression In the verbal protocol, without the problem solver being aware of it.
 References Clark, E.
 V.
, & Garnica, 0.
 K.
 Is he coming or going? On the acquisition of deictic verbs.
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1974, J_3, 559572.
 Ericsson, K.
 A.
, fi Simon, H.
 A.
 Verbal reports as data.
 Psychological Review, 1980, 87, 215251.
 Fillmore C.
 Pragmatics and the description of discourse.
 In C.
 Fillmore, G.
 Lakoff, & R.
 Lakoff (Eds.
), Berkeley studies in syntax and semantics.
 Vol.
 I.
 Berkeley, CA: Department of Linguistics, University of California, 1974.
 Greeno, J.
 G.
 Hobbits and ores: Acquisition of a sequential concept.
 Cognitive Psychology, 1974, 6, 270292.
 Jeffries, R.
, Poison, P.
 G.
, Razran, L.
, & Atwood, M.
 A process model for missionariescannibals and other rivercrossing problems.
 Cognitive Psychology, 1977, 9.
, 412440.
 Kohler, W.
 The mentality of apes.
 London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1925.
 Levin, J.
 A.
 Continuous processing with multilevel memory representations.
 La Jolla, CA: Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, 1981.
 Levin, J.
 A.
 Proteus: An activation framework for cognitive process models.
 Marina del Key, CA: Information Sciences Institute, 1976.
 Newell, A.
, & Simon, H.
 A.
 Human problem solving.
 Englewood Cliffs, NJ: PrenticeHall, 1972.
 Nisbitt, R.
 E.
, & Wilson, T.
 D.
 Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports on mental processes.
 Psychological Review, 1977, 84.
 231259.
 Thomas, J.
 C.
, Jr.
 An analysis of behavior in the hobbltsorcs problem.
 Cognitive Psychology, I97i, 6, 257269.
 202 Representing ProblemSolving Episodes Arthur M.
 Farley and Oavid L.
 IcCarty ** ABSTRACT The understanding of simple, narrative episodes in which a protagonist successfully realizes a goal through a sequence of actions is studied.
 In two experiments, subjects rated the acceptability of sentences of the form "The protagonist does ACT Ĵ  in order that the protagonist could ACT 2", where ACT 2 and ACT }_ were actions from the episode.
 Ratings were predicted by (I.
e.
, inversely related to) distance within a narrative representation which organizes actions into sequences (action chains) reflecting aspects of the problemsolving plan employed by the protagonist.
 Subjects separated action chains that had been interleaved in a text.
 Mishap, irrelevant, and restorative actions were not incorporated directly into an attempt structure.
 Corrective actions, undoing the ill effects of mishaps, were Incorporated.
 Further research is suggested.
 I INTRODUCTION The episode has been discussed as a major, cognitive constituent of narrative discourse (e.
g.
, Thorndyke, 1977; Rumelhart, 1975, 1977; Handler and Johnson, 1977).
 An episode encompasses the situations and actions occurring during a protagonist's efforts to realize a desired goal.
 The goal may be that of performing a certain action or of establishing a desired situation.
 Table 1 presents a grammar describing a representation for successful problemsolving episodes.
 Rule 1 of the grammar indicates that an episode consists of a problem and its solution.
 Rule 2 indicates that the elements of a problem are a situational context, a triggering event giving rise to a goal, and the goal Itself.
 The triggering event is either an action taken by the protagonist or some external occurrence in the environment (Rule 4).
 Rule 6 states Is represented as the goal.
 Rule 7 attempt generates of an action or an preactions.
 The g Department of the Artificial that the solution to the problem one or more attempts to realize indicates that a problemsolving an attempt structure consisting action preceded by one or more pal action, that directly Computer and Information Science, Intelligence Center, SRI Internati subordinate to an attempt, may itself be the goal or may establish the goal situation.
 A preact ion of an action is another action which establishes one or more necessary preconditions of that action.
 These preconditions are implicit subgoals of the problemsolving activity.
 Since attention here will be focused on action interrelationships, these subgoal situations are not explicitly represented by the grammar.
 Finally, Rule 8 states that a preaction is an action or may be recursively expanded into an action preceded by one or more preactions of its own.
 The terminal elements of our representation gramnar are STATE, ACTION, and OCCURENCE.
 These elements are to be bound to information elements from a given episode text during understanding either by instantiation of a known, schematic episode representation or by construction of a grammarbased representation.
 This process corresponds to explaining protagonist's actions (Wilensky, 1978).
 The attempt structure generated for a given episode represents the (intentional) enablement relations existing among actions of a protagonist's problemsolving activity.
 A given action of a text may be bound to several ACTION elements in the attempt structure, establishing necessary preconditions for more than one subsequent action.
 For example, entering a room may enable acquisition of several instruments necessary to realize the goal of an episode.
 Furthermore, what appears as one sequence of actions in an episode text may constitute several subsequences of actions, each establishing different necessary preconditions of a single, subsequent action.
 This is demonstrated in Figure 1, which presents a problemsolving episode and associated representation.
 Let an action chain be a sequence of actions which is computed from an attempt structure as follows: Begin with an action bound to an ACTION element subordinate to a PREACTION element having no subordinate PREACTION elements; continue the sequence with actions bound to ACTION elements directly subordinate to successive, parent PREACTION elements; and end with the goal action.
 For example, the action chains of the episode presented in Figure 1 are (5,6,7,11) and (8,9,10,11).
 Let the distance D(al,a2) between actions al and a2 of an attempt structure equal the University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon, on leave at onal, Menlo Park, California.
 ** Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon.
 203 (positional) index of a2 actions al and minus the index of al In a common action chain or be undefined If they are not elements of a common chain.
 For example, D(5,ll) Is 2 In the episode structure of Figure 1, while D(10,8) equals 2.
 When D(al,a2) Is positive, the extent to which al enables a2 decreases as D(al,a2) increases.
 Thus, acceptability ratings of sentences stating such enablement would be predicted to decrease.
 If the distance measure is less than or equal to zero or if the two actions are not elements of a common action chain, then al does not enable a2.
 Acceptability ratings should be uniformly low for sentences stating such enablement.
 We briefly describe two experiments addressing these predictions.
 A more complete discussion of the experiments and results is presented elsewhere (Farley and McCarty, 1980).
 II EXPERIMENTS Experiment I used two different attempt structures to generate four episode texts.
 The attempt structure for onechain episodes consisted of a single chain containing seven actions.
 The attempt structure for twochain episodes consisted of two action chains each containing four actions; each episode contained seven actions as the goal action was a member of both action chains.
 A first sentence related the triggering event and goal of tlie episode; a second provided setting Information.
 The rrfmalniig sentences described the sequence of seven actions performed to achieve the goal.
 One sentence in the active voice was generated for each action.
 Two surface versions of each twochain episode were generated.
 In one, the action chains were interleaved In the text; a sentence describing an action i'l one action chain was followed by a sentence from the ot>ier chain.
 In the other, the action chains were kept Intact; one action chain was coiapletely described before actions from the •jCher rfeie mentioned.
 Figure 1 Is one of the Intact, twochain episodes used.
 Furthermore, two versions of each Intactchaln text were generated, differing In which action chain occurred first.
 A set of test sentences was prepared for each episode accorJlng to the following general framework: "{AcCion1} In order that {pronoun} could {verbphrase of Acclon2}.
", where {Actlonl} and {ActLon2} were bound to sentences describing actions in the episode and the {pronoun} refL'rri;d to the protagonist.
 I'or onechain episodes, the sentences differed with respect to distance In the attei;i,5t structure.
 All possible positive and 7,i?r<) distance test sentences were generated; sentences with negative distances of 1 and 2 also were generated.
 For the twochain episodes, all positive distance sentences were generated such that the mainclause action preceded the o.
irposeciause action in one version.
 Sontenrr^s differ.
;d as to whether or not the tJo actions oi:C'irr»;d within tlie same action chain.
 Subjcrjts recei/el f yur episodes .
;ich test sentences and inst rnc c Lous; !;hey were informed that they wee Co make ar.
.
.
f>ntabl I ity ratings of test sentences.
 Marking the space next to "NA" indicated complete unacceptablllty (a rating of 1) while the space next to "A" indicated complete acceptability (a rating of 7).
 Different degrees of acceptability could be Indicated by marking appropriate spaces between the two extremes.
 Subjects were Instructed to read carefully each episode and were allowed to refer to the episode while rating sentences.
 Results of Experiment 1 are presented in Table 2.
 In short, results indicated a significant distance effect, with most pairwise comparisons yielding significant differences in predicted directions.
 Within a given episode, a protagonist may perform actions which are peripheral to goal satisfaction.
 Two types of peripheral actions are restorative and irrelevant actions.
 A restorative action is one that reestablishes a normal situation in the environment disturbed by prior problemsolving.
 An example would be closing a purse after removing car keys or putting away a tool after using It.
 An Irrelevant action is one that either appears to have no pragmatic utility or to be related to goals external to that of the episode.
 An example would be smelling a rose while mowing the lawn or turning down the oven while washing dishes.
 A protagonist may even perform an action that disrupts progress toward the goal of an episode and then must recover from this setback.
 A mishap is an action that destroys realization of a situation created by prior, goaldirected actions of an episode.
 Corrective actions are actions that reestablish the situation existing prior to a mishap.
 An example of a mishap would be dropping a tool, which would elicit the corrective actions of bending down and picking up the tool.
 Peripheral actions and mishaps should not be Incorporated Into the attempt structure for a given episode.
 As such, acceptability ratings of test sentences Involving such actions should be low.
 On the other hand, corrective actions should be Incorporated as elements of a preactlon subtree of (or episode subordinate to) the action enabled by the situation tliey serve to reestablish.
 As such, corrective actions do enable subsequent actions in an action chain.
 Experiment 2 was designed to test the above predictions regarding these four types of actions.
 Two new episodes contained one restorative and one Irrelevant action; a third contained one mishap and two associated corrective actions.
 Each episode Involved only one action chain except for the second action chain produced by the two corrective actions of the cliird episode.
 A fourth episode was characterized by actions that were low In a priori associativity, with objects used In novel ways; tills episode will not be discussed here.
 Materials and procedures were as In the first experiment.
 The results Indicated significant distance effects for all three stories.
 The Duncan test Indicated the following differences among means by distance, £ < .
01: for the restorative/irrelevant stories, 1 > 2  3 > 4 > 5 and 1 > 2 > 3 = 4 > 5 ; for the intshap/correct Ion story, 1 2 > 3 > A.
 These results are consistent with those of fixporlraent 1.
 Further analyses attempted to answer whetlier mishaps, restorative.
 Irrelevant, and 204 corrective actions are incorporated into attempt structures.
 Two kinds of test sentences were examined for each action type.
 In one, the critical actions are expressed in the main clause, enabling subsequent goaldirected actions.
 In the other, the actions of interest occur in the purpose clause, enabled by prior, goaldirected actions.
 Results indicated that restorative, irrelevant, and mishap actions are not represented as being enabled by goaldirected actions; mean acceptability ratings for such sentences were consistently below 2.
0.
 Ratings were similar for sentences stating enablement by mishap and restorative actions.
 Some irrelevant actions were understood to weakly enable subsequent goaldirected actions; however, mean ratings were still below 3.
0.
 An indepth discussion of these results, as well as those for the lowassociativity episode, are presented elsewhere (Farley and McCarty, 1980).
 Results indicated that subjects understand corrective actions to be part of the goaldirected behavior of the protagonist.
 However, the enablement relation between corrective and subsequent goaldirected actions was not as strong as the relation between the original goaldirected actions and the same, subsequent goaldirected actions.
 This effect may well have been produced by differing levels of a priori relational density (Graesser, 1978).
 In our episode, walking to a bookcase normally is more highly associated with dictionary use than is bending down (to pick up the dropped dictionary).
 Relational density could also account for an effect of episode in Experiment 1.
 Ill CONCLUSION Results of both experiments were generally consistent with predictions made in accordance with the attempt structures described by the episode grammar.
 The strength of enablement was inversely related to positive distances within action chains and not correlated with surface (text) distances.
 The action chains computed from the grammatical representations closely resemble causal event chains described by Schank and Abelson (1977).
 Results obtained here lend support to Schank and Abelsonlike proposals, as do recent results of Graesser (1981).
 We demonstrate the effectiveness of an acceptability rating paradigm for assessing such structures.
 Our results indicate that only goaldirected actions are incorporated into attempt structures.
 To state that restorative, irrelevant, and mishap actions are not incorporated is not to say that they are not remembered.
 It merely says that such actions are not incorporated into a representation of enablement relations between actions.
 An attempt structure is only part of a more complex episode representation.
 How else may actions differ cognitlvely? This question suggested an experimental paradigm in which subjects rate sentences (actions) as to their appropriateness for inclusion in an episode summary, followed by an unexpected recall task.
 Results of an initial pilot study were as follows: For summary inclusion, goaldirected actions are much preferred over actions not specific to the goal of an episode; within the class of goaldirected actions, instrumental actions are rated higher than movement actions, which are preferred over corrective actions.
 As for immediate recall, goaldirected actions yield a pattern similar to that for summarization ratings.
 However, mishap and irrelevant actions are recalled as well as, if not better than, goaldirected actions.
 The latter result suggests that such actions, though not incorporated into the attempt structure, are in a more inclusive episode representation.
 Such actions can be considered potentially important in determining Intent of a narrative.
 Research confirming pilot study results is needed.
 REFERENCliS 1.
 A.
 M.
 Farley and D.
 L.
 McCarty, "Understanding ProblemSolving Episodes," Technical Report, Computer Science Department, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon (1980).
 2.
 A.
 C.
 Graesser, "How to Catch a Fish: The Memory and Representation of Common Procedures," Discourse Processess, 1_, pp.
 7289 (1978).
 3.
 A.
 C.
 Graesser, S.
 P.
 Robertson, and P.
 A.
 Anderson, "Incorporating Inferences in Narrative Representations: A Study of How and Why," Cognitive Psychology, 13, pp.
 126 (1981).
 4.
 J.
 M.
 Handler and N.
 S.
 Johnson, "Remembrance of Things Parsed: Story Structure and Recall," Cognitive Psychology, £, pp.
 111151 (1977).
 5.
 D.
 Rumelhart, "Notes on a Schema for Stories," in Representation and Understanding, D.
 Bobrow and A.
 Collins (Eds.
).
 New York: Academic Press (1975).
 6.
 D.
 Rumelhart, "Understanding and Summarizing Brief Stories," in Basic Processess in Reading: Perception and Comprehension, D.
 La Berge and S.
 J.
 Samuels (Eds.
).
 Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaura Associates (1977).
 7.
 R.
 C.
 Schank and R.
 P.
 Abelson, Scripts, Plans, Goals, and Understanding, Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates (1977).
 8.
 P.
 Thorndyke, "Cognitive Structures in Comprehension and Memory of Narrative Discourse," Cognitive Psychology, 9_, pp.
 77110 (1977).
 9.
 R.
 Wilensky, "Why John Married Mary: Understanding Stories Involving Recurring Goals," Cognitive Science.
 2̂ , pp.
 235266 (1978).
 205 Table 1 Table 2 An Episode Representation Granunar Rule 1: Episode > Problem Solution Rule 2: Problem > Situation Event Goal Rule 3: Situation > STATE* Rule 4: Event > ACTION | OCCURENCE Rule 5: Goal > STATE | ACTION Rule 6: Solution > Attempt* Rule 7: Attempt > ACTION | (Preaction* ACTION) Rule 8: Preaction > ACTION | (Preaction* ACTION) * Indicates one or more occurences of the associated element.
 I Indicates alternative elements.
 Bob had recently received a note from a friend (1) and wanted to send hira a letter (2).
 He was in a post office (3) and had his friend's address on an index card in his shirt pocket (4).
 Bob went to a postal clerk (5).
 Then lie bought a stamp (6).
 N'ext Rob put the stamp un the letter (7), Then he unhattoned his shirt pocket (8).
 He took out the index c.
ttd (9).
 Then he copied the address onto the envelope (10).
 "laally, Bob ra.
iiLed the letter ( U ) .
 Episode JOHN MARY Mean Acceptability Ratings Onechain Episodes Distance 2 1 1.
45 1.
11 1.
26 1.
20 0 1.
55 1.
69 JOHN MARY Episode BOB FLO BOB FLO 6.
22 6.
19 1 1.
80 1.
59 5.
72 5.
00 4,97 4.
78 Twochain Epis Distance Same 1 2 6.
48 6.
43 4.
99 4.
81 Different 2 3 1.
60 1.
73 1.
96 4.
79 3.
97 odes 3 4.
65 3.
75 4 1.
72 4.
27 4.
08 5 2.
10 1.
26 4.
63 4.
33 Episode Problem SiCiiarLon Event Oo.
il STATi: si'Ar̂ : occuremci: actcom Solution Attempt (3) (4) (1) (2) ACTION Preaction Preaction / \ Preaction ACTLOM Preaction ACTION (7) / \ (10) Preaction AtiriOfl Prediction ACTION I I (6) (9) ACTION ACl'lON I ' (5) (8) t'lJiire 1 An F.
<;tmple Rpisode ind its Represeitat ion 206 WHERE PROCESS AND MEASUREMENT MODELS MEET: Evaluation of states in problem solvinq Jan Drosler, Universitat Regensburq, Germany.
 Summary: Any process model of problem solving trying to capture goal directed progress needs an evaluation function of the states.
 Maximation of its gradient at each step serves as a decision rule in chosing among different legally possible moves.
 The present analysis qives sufficient conditions for the existence of an evaluation of states which is applicable to customary laboratory problems in the study of problem solving.
 The evaluation, moreover, is shown to establish a foundation for the measurement of "Insight", the anticipatory aspect of human problem solving capacity.
 Representation of states In this study, the sets of states occuring in a problem solving task are represented by a linear module over a ring.
 This reduces the set of states to be discussed to those, which can be represented by vectors.
 In the study of problem sol ing this happens more often than not.
 Luchins' waterjar task, defines states by triples of numbers, the components of which stand for the fillings in three jars.
 The missionarycannibal task represents its states as triples, containing the numbers of missionaries, of cannibals, and of the boat's disposal.
 For other tasks in use like the "Tower of Hanoi" numerical coding is not standard, but easily achievable.
 This even holds for proof problems from the propositional calculus.
 Vectorial coding only makes sense if it serves a psychological purpose like permitting computation of some sort.
 The most simple calculation is addition.
 This raises the question, whether representation of states by vectors makes vector addition a meaningful operation, the result of which reflects empirical facts.
 At first sight it does not look that way; If in the context of the Luchins waterjar task filling is interpreted as addition, then the jars are likely to run over.
 Water is spilled and problem solving within the rules yet to be discussed appears to be impossible.
 Likewise with the missionarycannibal task addition can lead to an uncontrolled Increase of the number of missionaries or cannibals destroying the problem setting.
 The same appears to hold for other tasks.
 Within the present study these risks are abolished by a simple device: It consists in a representation of states by finite sets.
 These are, e.
g.
, with the Luchins waterjar task the integers {O, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) or with the missionarycannibal task the integers {O, 1, 2).
 with the proof problems the Inteqers {O, 1).
 This confinement has two decisive effects for the analysis of problem solving tasks.
 For once in the finite case anything that can happen may be analyzed.
 On the other hand, an addition of states can be introduced as a meaningful representation as soon as a boundary condition is introduced.
 It consists in identifying the largest integer with zero.
 It is agreed upon, that, e.
g.
, any three missionaries meeting waive the crossing, and that a jar filled with six units of liquid triggers a mechanism which automatically empties the jar.
 Under these conditions the finite set of integers assumes the structure of a residual classes ring, which is the minimal structure necessary for the introduction of vectors.
 Rules as equations and Inequalities The definitions given above further the analysis of the problem solving task because the drawing rules which are usually only given verbally, now can be formulated as equations or inequalities.
 This possibility is never qiven a priori, hut presupposes structural foundations like those discussed.
 207 The proposition, calling for a constant sum of filling levels in the Luchins waterjar task only makes sense, after at least a linear module has been defined.
 Then fillinq can be represented by vector addition: Any filling is given by the vector difference of two states represented by the vectors of their triples of fillinq levels.
 Such vector difference exists for any two states, even if they are not transformable into one another by the rules.
 It is a system of equations, which defines the legal moves and differentiates them from the illegal ones.
 It can be shown, for the tasks mentioned,that this is always possible, even for the proof task from the prepositional calculus, algebraization of which was introduced by Stone (1936).
 Addition represents filling with the waterjar task, crossing with the missionarycannibal task and the logical exclusive "or" with the proof problems.
 Because of the finite set of states, for any equation representing a drawing rule the solution set of states fulfilling this equation can be found.
 This set comprises Sj.
.
'.
'le states, e.
g.
, for one rule in the Luchins task those which have a constant sum of filling levels.
 It may comprise pairs of states, the second member of which can be reached from the first in one move under the rule in question.
 The purpose served by algebraization of the task is twofold: For once the discourse is no lonaer confined to a certain, e.
o.
, waterjar task but rather to the unlimited set of possible tasks of this kind.
 The realizations, presently used in the problem solvina laboratory, are then special cases with certain parameters.
 Another purpose, however, is reflected by the fact, that the solution sets of states fulfilling the individual rules again allow computation of useful results.
 The calculus of relations Any binary relation can be represented by a matrix over a Boolean ring.
 In the present case the rows (as well as the columns) stand for the finite set of states.
 Entries of "one" in any cell means, that the row state can be transformed into the column state in one move according to the rule under study.
 Somewhat modifying a matrix calculus introduced by Copilowish (191B) permits algebraic manipulation of such matrices.
 Any two relations, each representing a rule, thus lead to a new relation.
 It represents, what is qiven if both rules are obeyed.
 The resulting relation, e.
g.
, with the Luchins waterjar task, characterizes transformation of row state into column state In simultaneous accordance with all rules.
 In this connection the unitary relations first have to be transformed into binary relations by logical product.
 If, e.
g.
, both, the giving and the receiving vessel have to conform to the condition of constant sum of filling levels.
 Reachability of states Analysis now turns to the question whether any column state can be reached by the given row state in a certain number of legal moves.
 This amounts to logical analysis whether the state can be reached in one or in two, etc.
 legal moves.
 The representation chosen here permits this analysis to be performed algebraically for arbitrarily large matrices.
 The result is found out for any qiven number of steps which, however, need not be larger than the number of states minus one.
 The resulting binary matrices contain entries "one" if the column state is reachable from the row state in so and so many legal steps as were analyzed in that matrix.
 The final step of the task analysis consists in combining these matrices into a single one the cells of which tell, in at least how many steps a row state can be transformed into the column state.
 This is done by pairwise comparison of successive matrices of the first kind.
 If the matrix of n1 steps does not yet show transformability of the row state into the column state but the matrix in n steps at that cell carries a "one", then this n is identified as the minimal number of legal steps in question.
 The evaluation of each state with respect to any goal state can be read off this "reachability matrix in n steps" as the entries of the column vector associated with the qoal state.
 This completes analysis of sufficient conditions for the existence of a state evaluation function for arbitrary qoal states in a problem solvinq task such as they are used in the 208 psychological laboratory.
 Fig.
 1 gives an example for a missionarycannibal task with first component in the triple designating the number of missionaries, the second the number of cannibals, and the third, if 1, availability of the boat, all at the left bank.
 There are 2 missionaries, 2 cannibals and a boat capacity of 2.
 The computation of the combined drawing rule eliminates 6 of the 33«2 = 18 states as not reachable.
 221 210 211 200 201 110 111 020 021 010 Oil 210 1 211 2 200 1 201 6 110 1 111 4 020 1 021 4 010 3 Oil 6 000 5 3 2 7 2 5 2 5 4 7 6 1 4 1 2 3 2 1 4 3 5 2 3 2 3 2 5 4 5 2 7 2 3 2 1 3 2 3 2 5 4 5 2 1 2 1 5 4 7 6 1 2 1 3 2 1 Flq.
 1.
 Symmetric reachability matrix in n steps for (2,2,2) missionarycannibal problem computed from the rules within the module representation.
 Entries give minimal number of steps from row to column state.
 The measurement of "insight" For each qoal, the evaluations establish a binary relation over the set of states.
 It can be interpreted as ".
.
.
 closer to the goal than .
.
.
" and is connected and transitive.
 Tt is, therefore, a weak ordering relation which plays a central role in measurement theory (cf.
 Krantz et al.
, 1971).
 The weak ordering toqether with some other postulates permits measurement in the technical sense of goal distance.
 Now, this magnitude is not in need of measurement because It can be calculated under the conditions specified.
 Still the cue can be taken up for the analysis of psycholoqlcal data which consist of sequences of the states actually visited in the course of an experiment in problem solvinq.
 Each step can be interpreted as the result of a preference reaction over the leqal steps possible at that choice point.
 This opens up the possibility of scalinq the subjective evaluation by moans of a measurement model, e.
g.
, of ordinal measurement.
 Variation of the parametrlzation of a task creates problems of differing but controlled complexity.
 The problem solver's "insight" is the amount of complexity, expressed as given minimal length of solution path, the laboratory data of which do not invalidate the assumptions at the base of the measurement scaling procedure used.
 Empirical work by Sydow (1970) with the "Tower of Hanoi" shows, that the subjective evaluation is a function of both goal distance as well as distance from the starting point.
 References: COPILOwrSH, I.
M.
 Matrix development of the calculus of relations.
 J.
 Symb.
 Logic, 1948, n , 193203.
 KRANTZ, D.
H.
, LUCE, R.
D.
, SUPPES, P.
, & TVERSKY, A.
 Foundations of measurement.
 Vol.
 1.
 New York: Academic Press, 1971.
 LUCHINS, A.
S.
 Mechanization in Problem Solving.
 Psychological Monographs, 1942, 54 (whole nr.
 248) , 195.
 STONE, M.
H.
 The representation theorem for Boolean algebra.
 Trans.
 Am.
 Math.
 Soc.
 , 1936, 40, 37111.
 SYDOW, H.
 Zur metrischen Erfassung von subjektiven Problemzustanden und zu deren Veranderung im DenkprozeB.
 Z.
 Psychol.
, 1970, 177, 145198; 178, 150.
 209 positive Affect and Creative Problem Solvirq Alice M.
 Isen and Gary P.
 htowicki University of Maryland Baltitmore Cbmty Abstract Two stLidies rui simultaneously investigated the influence of positive affect on creative problan solving as indicated by Duncker's (1945) candle task.
 Results show that positive affect, as irxJuced by exposure to a funny movie, facilitated a subject's ability to solve the problem in comparison with those in control groups ivho either saw a control film or who did not view a film at all.
 In addition, in accord with previous findings (AJamson, 1952; Higgins «.
 Chaires, 1980) , subjects in another comparison group who were exposed to a facilitative display of the itans were also more likely than a control group to solve the candle task.
 Results are discussed in terms of the influence of a positive affective state on accessibility of material and on cognitive organization.
 Recently, researchers have showi a growing interest in the influence of affective states on cognitive processes.
 Earlier work had indicated an influence of affective states on social behavior such as helping and interpersonal attraction (e.
g.
, ^derman, 1972; Gouaux, 1971; Isen, 1970; Isen & Levin, 1972; Veitch & Griffitt, 1976); and more recent work had SLqgested exaninirq this relationship in terras of the influence of affect on the cognitive processes involved in the decision to engage in such social behavior (Levin & Isen, 1975; Isen, Shalker, Clark, {, Karp, 1978) .
 Most recently, attention has begun to focus on the influence of affect on cognitive processing more generally.
 TTiis work indicates a nunber of influences on cognition.
 Fbr exanple, a statedependentlearning effect of affective state has been observed under sane circunstances (intense affect induction and maximal discriininability of the lists of vvords learned in the different states) , as had been found earlier for other states such as drug and alcoholic intoxication (Bower, 1981; Bower, Montiero & Gilligan, 1978; Henry, Weingartner, S.
 Murphy, 1973; Weingartner & Faillace, 1971; Weingartner, Miller, & Murphy, 1977).
 Work on the influence of affect on manory has also shown us that even a mild affective state of the kind likely to be experienced in everyday life (and of the kind previously shown to influence social behavior as described above) can influence cognitive processing.
 In addition, this influence may be even more general than that of a statedependent learnin) effect.
 Fbr exanple, a positive affective state has been showi to be capable of serving as a retrieval cue for positive material in manory, influencing sucli measures as the subset of words likely to be recalled from a majorized list and the reaction time for recall of affectcompatible words (Isen, Shalker, Clark, & Karp, 1978; Teasdale & Fogarty, 1979; Teasdale & Russell, 1981).
 Ttiese latter findings siqgest that affect influences not only memory but also cognitive organization and cognitive consequences of this organization.
 One study, for exanple, investigated the influence of affective state on judgment and evaluation.
 These results indicated that when people had been given a anall free gift, they were more likely to judge their consuner goods more favorably; and the authors of that paper attributed these improved opinions to the affectcued accessibility of positive material described above (Isen, et al.
, 1978).
 Positive feelings were hypothesized ("ind shown) to cue positive material in manory, and the presence of this material was hypothesized to influence the decisionmaking process with r^ard to affectcompatible judgments and behavior, which were shown to be affected by a positive feeling state.
 (This process was called a "cognitive loop," since the resulting positive judgments and behavior would then be expected to sustain the feeling state and the process.
) Ttiere is growing evidence, then, that positive affect can influence cognitive organization through what is broLqht to mind, and that the altered cognitive organization can then influence other ongoing cognitive processes.
 In the present paper, we test the hypothesis that one effect of this change in cognitive organization is to facilitate creative problem solving of the type that requires seeing things in new ways.
 Ttie task that we use is the "candle task" anployed by Karl Duncker in his demonstrations (in 1945) of creative problem solving (actually, his danonstration of "functional fixedness").
 In this task, the subject is presented with the common objects of a box of tacks, a candle, and a book of matches, and s/he is asked to attach the candle to the wall (a cork board) in such a way that it will burn without dripping wax on the table or floor beneath.
 The problan can be solved if the box is seen as an object separate from the tacks and its own properties recognized and utilized.
 The box can be anptied, tacked to the wall, and used as a platfonn for the candle, v^ich can then be lit and will not drip wax on the table or floor.
 Mamson (1952) showed that displaying the items involved in the task separately—that is, with the tacks on the table and the box anpty—highlighted their independence of one another and facilitated successful solution of the problem.
 Recently, Higgins and Chaires (1980) found that having subjects repeat the names of common pairs of objects, but in relatively unaccustomed linguistic structures that tended to differentiate the pair members instead of in the accustcmed undifferentiating structure ("tray and tomatoes" instead of "tray of tomatoes") facilitated performance on the candle task.
 They interpreted their results as due to the way in which the stimulus display is encoded and the increased accessibility of different constructs that could be used to characterize its elanents.
 TTiinkirq about the actual independence of usuallypaired or united items might allow them to be utilized more completely.
 We suggest that positive affect should also facilitate performance on such tasks through this same mechanisn, accessibility of cognitive material.
 But we propose that in the case of affect, accessibility facilitates creative problem solving, not through the particular content of that which comes to mind, but throiqh the overall amoint and variety of material cued, and concanitant charges in cognitive organization and processing strategies that accompany increased accessibility of this large volune of material (Isen, 1981) .
 We have already noted that positive affect has been found to cue positive material in memory.
 In addition, there is evidence that positive material tends to be more extensive and more interrelated than other material (Dousfield, 1944, 1950; Boucher & Osgood, 1969; Matlin & Stang, 1979; White, 1936; White S.
 Powell, 1936; see also Clark & Isen, 1980).
 Together with the knowledge that a positive state cues positive material, this would imply that a person who is feeling good will have access to a greater anoint and variety of material or ideas.
 TTiis should result in the person having more ideas about how to solve a problan requiring creative inventiveness, if she is asked to solve such a problan.
 n o In addition, if all of this is happening, a person v*io is feeling good will have .
t ( ;.
 .
•(•; .
! an increased cuiount of material, and it is therefore reasonable to suggest that he will organize it differently from the way he vould ii*ien not so abundant with ideas.
 There is some evidence, for exanple, that decisionmaking style is altered by positive affect, in the direction of more efficient, or at least speedier, processing (Isen, 1981) .
 This altered approach might well involve changes in organization of material which result in the person's seeing relationships not ordinarily seen.
 Fbr both of these reasons, then, a broader array of ideas and an altered organizational structure for processing than that allows the person to relate otherwiseunrelated itans, ve predict that positive affect should lead to improved creative problem solving.
 Method Subjects.
 Subjects were 65 male and fanale students enrolled in classes in introductory psycliology.
 Procedure.
 Subjects were admitted to the laboratory in groups of four.
 They vete seated and given a few minutes of introduction to the stidy.
 Then, in Study I subjects were shown a tenminute segment of a film, either a canedy film in Condition 1 (the positiveaffect condition) or a neutral film in Gandition 2.
 Subjects in Stiriy II, v^ich was run simultaneously with Study I and which thus can also be conceptualized as two additional conditions of Study I, saw no films, instead, in this study, differirq conditions were created by differences in the way in which the items presented to the subject as part of the candle task were displayed.
 In Condition 3, the control display was presented: a box filled with tacks, a candle, and a book of matches.
 In Cbndition 4, the sane items were presented, but the tacks were displayed in a pile next to the anpty box.
 Fbllowing the initial phases of the study, subjects were asked to fill out a wordratirq scale, in which they rated the pleasantness of unfaniliar words, as a manipulation check.
 Previous studies have used sucli indirect assesanents of affect (for exanple, ratings of ambiguous slides) , demonstrating their association with behavioral indices of positive affect such as willirqness to help another person (Isen & Shalker, 1977; Forest, Clark, Mills, & Isen, 1979) .
 Next, subjects were seated at individLsl tables in the four corners of the room.
 The materials for the candle task v^re on the table, in the appropriate display, but under a cover until the task was explained by the experimenter.
 After reading subjects the instructions, the experimenter removed the cover from the itans and gave subjects 10 minutes in which to solve the problan.
 Results Results of the manipulation check indicate that unfaniliar words were rated more positively by subjects in the positive affect condition than the control condition (t = 2.
0; p < .
05).
 Table 1.
 Percent and nunber of Correct Solutions to the Candle Task in Each of 4 Conditions.
 Facilitative Comedy Film Neutral Film No Film Control Display 9/12 75% 3/15 20% 2/15 = 13% 19/23 = 83% Table 1 presents the data showing the niinber and percent of subjects obtaining the solution in each condition.
 X tests indicate that both the facilitative display condition and the positive affect condition produced significantly more solutions than did the control conditions, which did not differ frcm each other (X = 15.
20, p < .
01; X = 6.
09, p < .
01, respectively) .
 Discussion (Xir results irxiicate that procedures designed to induce positive feelings can facilitate creative problem solving of the kind assessed by Duncker's (1945) candle task.
 Duncker spoke of people's inability to solve this task as reflecting "functional fixedness.
" Another way to view this task, or perhaps an elaboration of Duncker's idea, is that it involves the ability to see all aspects of the objects presented or to see anong than potential relationships other than the existing ones.
 Our interpretation of the fact that positive affect can facilitate this process is that it does so through the increased accessibility that it affords to the large volune of material that is positive material.
 This results, we believe, in a greater nunber of ideas caning to mind when feeling good and, as a result also, an altered method of organizing and processirq than that allows the person to see potential relationships not ordinarily seen.
 References Adcmson, R.
 E.
 Functional fixedness as related to problem solvirq.
 Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1952, 44, 288291.
 Aderman, D.
 Elation, depression and helping behavior.
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1972, 24, 91101.
 Boucher, J.
, & Osgood, C.
 E.
 The pollyanna hypothesis.
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1969, 8, 18.
 Bousfield, W.
 A.
 An anpirical study of the production of affectively toned itans.
 Journal of General Psychology, 1944, 30, 205215.
 Bousfield, W, A.
 The relationship between mood and the production of affectively toned associates.
 The Journal of General Psychology, 1950, 42, 6785.
 Bower, G.
 Mood and manory.
 American Psychologist, 1981, 36, 129148.
 Bower, G.
 H.
, Monteiro, K.
 P.
, S.
 Gilligan, S.
 G.
 Emotional mood as a context for learnirq and recall.
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1978, j[7, 573585.
 Clark, M.
, & Isen, A.
 M.
 Tbward understanding the relationship between affect and social behavior.
 Manuscript, 1980.
 Tb appear in A.
 H.
 Hastorf & Isen, A.
 M.
 (Ws.
) , Cognitive Social Psychology.
 N.
Y.
: ElsevierNorth tblland, in press.
 IXincker, K.
 On problemsolving.
 Psychological Monographs, 1945, 58, Vvhole No.
 5.
 Forest, D.
, Clark, M.
 S.
, Mills, J.
, & Isen, A.
 M.
 Helping as a function of feeling state and nature of the helpirq behavior.
 Motivation and Emotion, 1979, 3, 161169.
 Gouaux, C.
 Induced affective states and interpersonal attraction.
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1971, 20, 3743.
 211 Henry, C.
 M.
, Weirqartner, H.
, & Murphy, D.
 L.
 Influence of affective states and psychoactive driqs on verbal learning and memory.
 Americtin Journal of Psychiatry, 1973, U B , 966971.
 Hiqgins, E.
 T.
, 8.
 Chaires, W.
 M.
 Accessibility of interrelational constructs: Implications for stimulus encoding and creativity.
 Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1980.
 Isen, A.
 M.
 Success, failure, attention and reactions to others: Ttie warm glow of success.
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1970, 15, 294301.
 Isen, A.
 M.
 ftjsitive affect, decisionmaking style, and risktaking.
 Paper presented as part of the 17th Carnegie Sympasiim on Cbgnition: Cognition arri affect, 1981.
 Isen, A.
 M.
, & Levin, P.
 F.
 The effect of feeling good on helping: Cookies and kindness.
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1972, 21, 384388.
 Isen, A.
 M.
, i Shalker, T.
 E.
 Cb you "tecentuate the positive, eliminate the negative" when you are in a good mood? Unpublished manuscript.
 University of Maryland Baltimore Cbunty, 1977.
 Isen, A.
 M.
, Shalker, T.
, Qark, M.
, & Karp.
 L.
 Affect, accessibility of material in memory and behavior: A cognitive loop? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1978, 36, 112.
 Levin, P.
 F.
, Si Isen, A.
 M.
 Something you can still get for a dime: Further studies on the effect of feeling good on helping.
 Sociometry, 1975, ^ , 141147.
 Matlin, M.
, & Stang , D.
 Tlie Pollyanna Principle: Selectivity in Language, Manory and Thought.
 Cambridge, flass.
: Schenkman, 1979.
 Teasdale, J.
 D.
 , & Fogarty, S.
 J.
 Differential effects of induced mood on retrieval of pleasant and unpleasant events from episodic manory.
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 1979, 88, 248257.
 Teasdale, J.
 D.
, & Russell.
 Differential effects of induced mood on the recall of positive, najative, and neutral words, 1981, Manuscript, CKford University.
 Veitch, R.
, & Griffitt, W.
 Oiod news—bad news: Affective and interpersonal effects.
 Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 1976, 6, 69^75T Weirqartner, H.
, & Fail lace, L.
 A.
 Alcohol statedependent learnirq in man.
 Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 1971,253, 395406.
 Weingartner, H.
, Miller, H.
, s, Murphy, D.
 L.
 Moodstatedependent retrieval of verbal associations.
 Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 1977, 86, 276284.
 White, M.
 M.
 Some factors influencing the recall of pleasant and unpleasant words.
 American Journal of Psychology, 1936, 48, 134139.
 l*iite, M.
 M.
, & Etowell, M.
 TTie differential reaction time for pleasant and uipleasant vvords.
 American Journal of Psychology, 1936, 48, 126133.
 212 MEMORY IN STORY IHVEBTIOM Natalie Dehn Yale University AUTHOR is a story generating program (under development) being built as a model of how human authors make up stories.
 Like TALESPIN 14), AUTHOR requires humanlike knowledge of the world, but unlike TALESPIN, AUTHOR also requires humanlike memory organization of this knowledge.
 The two features of human memory most essential to the AUTHOR model of story generation are (1) reconstruction, and (2) reminding.
 The former is responsible for the directe<? nature of making up stories, the latter for the author s more "fortuitous" ideas and insights.
 1, The Importance of "R6"conatruction Directed story invention is, according to the AUTHOR model, basically a matter of 1.
 having some initial idea of what one is trying to invent, and 2.
 applying the same reconstructive memory accessing techniques used in remembering something old to develop, flesh out, and successively reformulate that idea into a complete draft.
 (Of course in invention one is not actually reconstructing; hence the quotes in "re"construction.
) This view of invention is, of course, basically the converse of Bartlett's theory of remembering ID: Bartlett viewed recall as very much akin to invention, while I am suggesting that invention is very much akin to recall.
 My reasons for turning Bartlett's theory around, for grounding a theory of invention in a theory of recall, are twofold: 1.
 There currently exists a better model of recall than of invention.
 In particular, Kolodner has developed a working process model of reconstructive recall of episodes from long term memory as part of the CYRUS system 15].
 This could serve as a basis for modeling other reconstructive memory accessing tasks, including story invention if it turns out to be one.
 •2.
 While inventiveness appears to be a widespread human capability, it does not seem to be basic or essential in the same sense that remembering, learning, and understanding are.
 Therefore, if the "re"constructive invention hypothesis holds, it would account for the relative cognitive luxury of inventiveness as a free byproduct of the relative cognitive neccessity of remembering.
 2.
 The Inportance of RemiDding That reminding is a natural consequence of human reconstructive memory architecture has been proposed and argued for by Schank (7).
 Basically the claim is that specific memories for some input are stored in memory at the points which provide the expectations used in understanding that input, particularly those expectations that are being violated.
 Reminding occurs when one later processes an input that one understands in terms of a shared memory structure.
 Reminding is a very comnon phenomenon, according to this theory, though we tend to only notice its occurance when it dredges up something relatively useless.
 Given a reconstructive memory architecture, anything being understood is likely to be understood in terms of a great many different structures and can be retrieved from several of them.
 There can thus be several ways of being reminded of any given thing, but whatever the route to the reminding, recalling the complete experience entails reconstructing the other structures used initially in understanding it.
 Reminding plays an important role in laying bridges from currently active memory structures to ones usefully, though not logically, related.
 Reminding thus underlies and helps explains informal reasoning.
 In the AUTHOR model, this form of reasoning is used heavily in story generation.
 One can never, of course, rely on getting reminded of something useful (i.
e.
, encountering a useful bridge), but given the structure and contents of reconstructive episodic memory, one is bound to have some useful remindings if one is doing enough memory accessing.
 The process of directed reconstructive invention is just such a source of memory accessing.
 In the normal process of memory access stemming from reconstructive invention, an author can be reminded of (1) experiences and observations external to the story thus far made up, such as of people she has known, things that have happened to her, ways people have reacted to various situations, etc.
, and (2) things internal to the story thus far made up characters, props, settings, situations, reactions, etc.
 The former is an important source of relevant material to be incorporated into the story.
 The latter helps the author 1.
 catch problems, such as unintentional expectation violations 2.
 pick up development of threads she was earlier distracted from by other narrative needs, and 3.
 further weave existing story threads into the fabric of the evolving story beyond that deliberately intended in the topdown initial invention of those threads "Story invention" should be taken to mean the invention of stories and fragments thereof episodes, characters, props, settings, etc.
 213 3.
 A Closer Look at Reconttruction A.
 Successive Reformulation There is a (weak) sense in vhich SAM [3) was a model of reconstructive recall of stories.
 It did not "record" stories verbatim in memory, but rather in terms of its prior schemas; in paraphrasing (recalling) such stories from these memory structures, it couldn't help but normalize/distort the stories, much as Bartlett'b subjects did in reading "War of the Ghosts".
 By this simple model, the reconstructive process was one of filling in of details and connections not explicitly stored as part of the story itself, from the given schema.
 As in Bartlett's experiments, anything in the original story that was too normal was ignored (because it could always be easily inferred); anything that was too weird was remembered as weird but could not be represented well.
 A better model of reconstructive memory (MOPs) evolved out of scripts, in response to Bower, Black, and Turner [21.
 MOPs 17) entail decomposition during understanding, thus allowing a great deal more sharing (and hence confusions).
 With this model arose the additional problem of "collecting" pieces spread all over memory.
 Recall became largely a matter of figuring out where in all of LTM to look.
 This problem was addressed by Kolodner in the CYRUS system.
 CYRUS has a great deal of episodic knowledge about Vance and Muskie, culled from news stories about each of them.
 This knowledge is "stored" in CYRUS's long term memory, from which it can be reconstructively retrieved.
 Consider, for instance, how CYRUS responded to the following quest ion: Q: Mr.
 Vance, has your wife ever met Mrs.
 Begin? A: Yes, most recently at a state dinner in Israel.
 What is especially interesting about this response is that to come up with it, CYRUS had to "deduce" that a likely place for it to have "stored" such an occurance in memory, if it did so, is at some social political event, such as a state dinner.
 (For details of how exactly it did so, again, see 15).
) It is also interesting to consider this example of recollective reconstruction from the perspective of story invention.
 Suppose, for instance, an author were writing a story in which she needed to have an encounter between the wife of the American Secretary of State and the wife of the Israeli Prime Minister, or in which she needed to get these two characters at the same place at the same time how would the author set this up? Well, one plausible place to have them meet is at some social political event, such as a state dinner; more specifically, a state dinner in Israel would do nicely.
 Realizing that that is a likely place for the two diplomatic wives to meet (which is the hardest part of the reconstructive process) i.
e.
, finding where to look in memory is thus the same for reconstructive recall and reconstructive invent ion.
 Reconstructive invention, like all difficult reconstruction.
 is a matter of successive reformulation.
 When probing memory, one may, rather than finding exactly what one is looking for, come up with a partial answer plus ideas about where to look further; pursuing these ideas may again fail to immediately lead to a solution, but rather further partially specify the answer and suggest yet further ideas.
 For instance, the author may have previously decided that she wants the story to be about a shy person encountering difficulties because of his shyness.
 This may be a good idea but it is too vague to include as is in the final story.
 One possible reformulation is that the shy person have to face a job as a doorto,door salesman.
^ This reformulation will itself undergo considerable reformulation.
 For one thing, there is still a good deal of further concretization needed  the details of his route, product line, colleagues, etc.
 For another, there is now a plausibility problem  why would a shy person ever become a salesman?! This plausibility question will lead to yet a further reformulation, and the "re"construction of an explanation e.
g.
, he was forced into it, or he didn't know what he was getting into.
 Each of these explanations need to be further reformulated into something more concrete the former, for instance, into the character's severe financial problems.
 This, in turn, may be reformulated into his being out of work and with a mother dying of cancer unless she can get some expensive therapy.
 Concretization and Plausibility Maintenance are just two sources of reformulation driving story generation.
 Another is Dramatization (making more hang on a decision, making an action harder).
 Yet another is Presentation of a Narratively Neccessary Fact: As the story world and events within it develop, some facts about the storyworld will turn out to be especially causally significant, such as that a particular character is shy, or that a particular door was left unlocked.
 In such a case, it is important to make sure that fact is introduced in the eventual story narrative, sufficiently strongly that the reader will have it available when need.
 One way of doing so is reformulating the fact into a complete episode (or episodes).
 Thus, if the critical murder scene hinges en the door being unlocked, the author will This is related to the successive refinement paradigm in planning of Sacerdoti l6l This reformulation would be arrived at by reconstruction: what sort of situation might a shy person find especially stressful? How exactly a particular author would arrive at this particular reformulation (or any of the others given below) is partially a matter of her idiosyncratic memory organization and content, but the point behind all these examples is to give a flavor of the process of successive reformulation in story invention.
 TALESPIN's invention of bears and caves was also weakly reconstructive in this same sense.
 "Deducing" where in memory something might be is not, of course, a matter of formal reasoning for CYRUS, but rather a matter of successive selection and application of search and instantiation strategies, as discussed in l5l.
 These especially significant storyfacts are typically invented by the author as post hoc justification for something already incorporated into the storyworld.
 An example of this we have already seen is the invention of the cancerous mother to motivate the shy salesman.
 Nonetheless, they must precede what they were invented to justify, both in storyworld time and in the narrative order of presentation.
 214 invent a secondary episode for the express purpose of introducing this fact.
 (This is not to say, of course, that the episode cannot also be made to accomplish other purposes.
) When something is especially important (such as a critical character trait of the protagonist), the author may vant to repeat it, for emphasis.
 While there is a stylistic role for literal repetition, far more interesting are conceptual repetitions.
 Such repetitions can be produced by successive reconstruction in multiple contexts.
 For instance, if it is essential to the main part of the story to realize how pathologically shy the protagonist is, the author needs to communicate before that point that he is shy.
 She may therefore reformulate this storyvorld fact into two or more episodes  for instance, the time that he crossed the street because.
.
.
 and the time he flunked a course because he was afraid to explain to the teacher that .
.
.
.
 Successive reformulation also has the interesting side effect, when viewed from the perspective of the memory accessing it entails, of greatly enhancing one's chances for dredging up useful remindingsl 3.
 Memory and the Process of Story Invention It should by now be apparent why humanlike memory organization is needed in a model of story generation.
 Long term memory is, in fact, the single most important component of the AUTHOR system.
 AUTHOR LTM is reconstructive and reminiscent, drawing heavily in its design both from Schank [7) and Kolodner [51.
 The AUTHOR program is starting with a prebuilt version of such a memory, supplying it with prior knowledge about such things as human goals, social roles, and interactions; the prebuilt memory is also richly studded with episodic traces of (faked) experiences that would have given rise to such knowledge.
 AUTHOR LTM evolves, however, in the process of story invention.
 This follows from a prediction stemming from the underlying Schankian theory that memory gets modified where accessed whenever something interesting results.
 Thus, as characters, situations, relations, etc.
 are invented and developed reconstructively from prior memory structures, they are remembered in appropriate places in memory.
 This may, in turn, lead to partial memory reorganization.
 There are two important effects of such memory modifications: ).
 They allow the author, in the process of making up a story, to be reminded of prior story decisions, important for reasons discussed previously.
 2.
 They partially account for the nonduplication of stories made up by an author, without appealing to randomness: given how critical the details of memory are to the exact ''reasoning" paths an author takes in story invention, this model predicts that the same person making up two stories, even if starting from the same idea, will come up with something different the second time.
 Human authors, of course, have their memory still further altered between stories, from external experiences.
 A further prediction of this memory model concerns what is comnonly referred to as "inspiration" and what is here seen as an especially useful reminding.
 Such a reminding experience is roost likely to occur when the author has very rich indexing  which is, indeed, the case once the author has "gotten into" the story.
 Yet another thing partially explained by this model is what makes a good story idea.
 A good idea is something that serves as an index into a rich enough part of LTM to get the reconstructive process going to the point of selfsustaining momentum; thus one person's good idea is another person's dud because of the idiosyncratic differences in memory organization and contents.
 There appears to be a consensus among authors (or at least among those who write about it) that good ideas are very hard to come up with deliberately, or even to recall once thought of.
 They are likely, rather, to be discovered fortuitously (such as in a deep and sudden feeling of insight), frequently when the author is engaged in some outside activity, and are likely to get lost again if left to their own devices.
 Given a good idea, though, experienced authors can sit down and start deliberately inventing.
 Thus, a minor, yet critical aspect of memory for story invention, needed to supplement human reconstructive LTM is "paper memory".
 It is in most ways vastly inferior (memory organization and indexing being very crude) but it is just what is needed as auxiliary storage of reconstructive pointers into LTM that are themselves very hard to remember.
 REFERENCES (1) Bartlett, F.
 C.
 (1932).
 Remembering.
 Cambridge University Press, London.
 [2l Bower, G.
 H.
 ; Black,J.
B.
 and Turner,T.
J.
 (1979).
 Scripts in Text Comprehension and Memory, Cognitive Psychology, 11, 177220.
 (31 Cullingford, Richard (1978).
 Script Application: Computer Understanding of Newspaper Stories.
 Ph.
 D.
 Thesis.
 Research Report #116.
 Department of Computer Science.
 Yale University, New Haven, CT.
 [It] Meehan, James R.
 (1976).
 The Metanovel: Writing Stories By Computer.
 Ph.
 D.
 Thesis.
 Research Report #74.
 Department of Computer Science.
 Yale University, New Haven, CT.
 151 Kolodner, Janet L.
 (1980).
 Retrieval and Organizational Strategies in Conceptual Memory; A Computer Model.
 Ph.
 D.
 Thesis.
 Research Report No.
 186.
 Department of Computer Science.
 Yale University, New Haven, CT.
 (61 Sacerdoti, Earl D.
 (1975).
 A Structure for Plans and Behavior.
 Ph.
 D.
 Thesis.
 SRI AI Center Technical Note 109.
 Menlo Park, CA.
 I7l Schank, Roger C.
 (in press).
 Dynamic Memory: A Theory of Learning In Computers and People.
 215 RECOGNIZING THEMATIC UNITS IN narratives' Brian J.
 Reiser.
 Wendy G.
 Lehnerl.
 and John B.
 Black Yale University Abstracl Lehnerl (1980) proposed a model themalic knowledge structures called 'plot units', which are structurally deflned sequences of mental states, positive events, and negative events In a clustering experiment.
 subjects were asked to son 36 stories into groups.
 These groups were labeled by the subjects, and that data used to identify the nature of each mental category.
 Plot units generally provided a good fit to the clustering patterns in the data, with higher level clusters corresponding to discriminations on the nature of the outcome and judgments about the 'fairness" of the protagonist.
 M u c h research in natural language processing has utilized an eventbased U.
cl of description.
 Schank and Abelson's (1977) model of scripts, plans, and goals is one such model, which has been both embodied in Artificial Intelligence programs (see Schank and Riesbeck, 1981 for a review) and tested in psychological experiments (Bower.
 Black &.
 Turner, 1979; Gibbs A Tenney, 1980.
 Graesser, Gordon & Sawyer.
 1979; Graesser, Woll.
 Kowalski A Smith.
 1980).
 Recently, the need for a thematic level of representation has been suggested (Dyer.
 1981; Lehnerl.
 1980; Schank, in press).
 In Lehnert's (1980) system, a story can be represented as a graph of overlapping "plot units'.
 A plot unit is structurally defined, representing a unique pattern of goal interaction and goal resolution of one or more characters Plol units are composed of three types of causally linked 'affect slates', representing menial stales (slates of desire), posiiive evenis (events thai result in positive affects) and negalive evenis (events that result in negative affects).
 Since plot units are defined as patterns of affect states, they are abstracted from specific content situations.
 For example, the "competition" plot unit is defined as parallel menial slates between two characters (representing mutually exclusive goals) where the goal of one character is realized as a positive event, and other goal is realized as a negative event Thus, one character winning an argument with another about which T V program to watch, and someone getting a job for which another character had applied, are both examples of the competition plot unit.
 To establish initial evidence for the use of a thematic representations in processing narratives, and for the plot unit system in particular, we employed a clustering task to Investigate subjects' perceptions of similarity between plots of different stories.
 Clustering tasks have previously been ' R a y G i b b b s , Scott R o b e r t s o n .
 Larry H u n t e r , a n d J o h n L e d d o p r o v i d e d valuable c o m m e n t s o n a n earlier draft of this paper.
 T h i s research w a s s u p p o r t e d b y a grant f r o m the S l o a n F o u n d a t i o n .
 used by cognitive psychologists to study Ihe organization of the mental lexicon (Miller.
 1972).
 and to examine Ihe hierarchical structure of stories (PollardGoll, McClosky, and Todres, 1979).
 In this experiment, subjects read a group of stones and were asked to sort them into groups of stories with "similar plots'.
 Stories of varying content were constructed using the same plol units There are many dimensions which subjects could conceivably use to judge thematic similarity: type of plan, emotions of the characters, contextual settings, personality of the main character, desirability of the story situation, etc.
 W e expected, however, that Ihe plol unit analysis would predict judgments of themalic similarity, and therefore that stories built of the same plol units would be grouped together by the subjects.
 Method.
 Thirty six two or three sentence stories were constructed from six sets of plol units.
 Stories constructed of Ihe same plol units concerned different types of problems, goals, and evenis.
 The plot units used in these stories are: I.
 Stories 16: Competition, Denial, Retaliation, Fleeting Success.
 X and Y have confiicting goals, and X's are satisfied.
 Y asks X lo agree and satisfy his goals, but the request is turned down.
 Y retaliates by doing something which terminates X's original success.
 2.
 Stories 712: Competition, Denial, Change of Mind.
 Success.
 X and Y have confiicting goals, and X's arc satisfied.
 Y asks X to agree and satisfy his goals, but Ihe request is turned down.
 Y finds another way to successfully satisfy his goals.
 3.
 Stories 1318: Request Honored with Nested Promise and Reneged Promise.
 X makes a request and has lo promise something lo Y in return for Y's granting the request However, X never performs his part of Ihe bargain 4.
 Stories 1924: Threat, Problem Resolution.
 X threatens Y, who finds a way lo overcome the threat.
 5.
 Stories 2530: Failure, Shared Negative Event.
 X fails in achieving some goal, and V shares in X's failure.
 5.
 Stories 3136: Regrettable Mistake, Problem Resolution.
 X does something (accidentally) which is a negalive event for both Y and X.
 This motivates X to do something which is positive for Y.
 Thirty six Yale undergraduates were each given these stories in one of four random orders.
 The subjects were told to read all Ihe stories once, and then sort them into groups, placing stories with "similar plots" into Ihe same group.
 They were told to construct roughly between two and twelve groups, although they were to consider that as only a guideline.
 After the subject.
 were finished classifying the stories into groups, Ihcy were asked lo label each group with a phrase that described the stories in that group.
 Results.
 Johnson's (1967) hierarchical clustering analysis provides a method of assessing the prototypical or average sorting of the stories, which may be used to determine whether Ihe plol unit graphs arc successful in predicting which stories will tend to be sorted together.
 The analysis produces a tree structure, showing the progressive merging of items empirically less and less similar (i.
e.
.
 sorted into the same group less frequently) into larger and larger clusters.
 The "diameter" or 'minimum" clustering algorithm (Johnson.
 1967) was 216 36 30 20 10 29 30 28 27 25 maladapt ive reaponieB cheating, broken promise ^ failure, disappointment appeasement, corrected mistake things work out alternate plans Figure 1.
 Hierarchical clustering diagram for the 36 stories sorted by subjects.
 The numbers on the horizontal axis represent similarity scores.
 If a cluster appears with score n, it means that each and every pair of its stories were sorted together by at least n subjects.
 Clusters are labeled with the most frequent tags given by the subjects that were cormon to all the stories in the cluster.
 The tlories of groups 2 and 4 arc more similar lo each other (ban lo (he stories of group 6, although all three components arc weakly clustered together Groups 2 and 4 appear lo be linked since the stories groups contain positive and reasonable goal resolutions (finding an alternative solution, overcoming a threat).
 Group 6 also contains a reasonable goal resolution, although it differs in that (he protagonist who resolves the problem si(ua(ion had inadver(en(ly crea(ed i( (for himself and ano(her charac(er) Discussion.
 The six clus(ers of s(ories found in(heda(a correspond very well with (he six groups of s(orie$ as prcdic(ed by the plot uni( represen(a(ions.
 Further, some of the subjects' labels accurately capture the gist of a plot unit (eg.
, "broken promise", "corrected mistake"), at the same level of abstraction.
 The weaker (major) clusters found in the data indicate (ha( subjec(s are also sensi(ive (o o(her more abs(rac( level of represen(a(ion The (hree major clus(ers may be described by the type of outcome, and some judgment of the "justifiability" of (he pro(agonis('s actions.
 Thus, in the major cluster composed of groups I and i.
 there is a malicious (and probably judged to be unjustified) acdon on (he par( of (he pro(agonist to achieve his goal.
 In contrast, in the major cluster composed of groups 2, 4, and 6, the protagonist adopts a justified plan.
 In groups 2 and 4, the protagonis( fmds a ra(ional solution (o a problem, while in group 6, the protagonist adopts a positive plan to rectify a problem si(ua(ion he has acciden(ally created.
 In both of (hese major clusters, the pro(agonis('s goal is achieved.
 In (he cluster of the group 5 stories, the pro(agonis('s goal resul(s in failure.
 Subjects' labels also provide support for a classification by general type of outcome ("failure", "everything works out") and judgments of fairness and motive ("maladaptive responses", "radonal behavior", "malicious behavior").
 Thus, in sum, (he (hree major clus(ers of $(ories correspond to (I) the protagonist's malicious achievement of a goal.
 (2) justified achievement of a goal, and (.
1) failure lo achieve a goal.
 In general, i( seems thai subjccis were more sensirive lo the types of actions and types of oulcomes than (hey were (o (he types of initial problem si(ua(ions.
 Thus, descripdons of actions and ou(comes were used (o label (he groups, (e.
g.
, "maladapdve responses", "reneged promise", "disappointment", 'failure', "(hings work out", "corrected mistake", and "appeasemcnl"), bu( the motiva(ion of (he problem si(ua(ion (eg, (he compe(i(ion, threat, or denied request) not mentioned in labeling the stories.
 Further, the stories of groups I and 2, which had the same problem situation (competition, denial) but different solutions (retaliation, alternate plans) were no( clus(ered (oge(her, while similar soludons to differen( problems were connec(ed in the three major clusters.
 The experiment presented here indicates that there is a thematic analysis taking place during s(ory unders(anding, a( leas( in this somewhat artificial task It seems likely that the knowledge structures exhibited in this task would be used in a more typical understanding situation.
 In particular.
 Lehner(.
 Black, and Reiser (1981) have shown (hat plot uni( represen(a(ions provide a generally good predic(ion of subjec(s' summaries of narradvcs.
 bu( leaves unspecified (he nature of (he problem si(ua(ion (a threat).
 The abberant story from this group (*21) may have been sorted with (he group 6 stories because the problem soludon is of a more coopera(ive na(ure.
 making i( more like correcting a mis(akc than reacdng (o a (hrea( The next componen( of (he cluster was formed of (he six s(ories of group 2.
 which were labeled wi(h 'al(erna(e plans" and ei(her "(hings work out' or "radonal problem solu(ion' These labels 8ccura(ely cap(ure bo(h (he "change of mind* plot uni(, and (he final "success" uni(, withou( specifying (he na(ure of (he problem.
 The third component of (he cluster is formed of the six stories of group 6, which were labeled with 'appeasement' and 'correc(eH a mis(ake".
 "Appeasemen(" indica(es a simple repayment, while 'corrected a mistake" more accurately reflects the regre((able mis(ake and problem resolution plo( uni(s.
 References Bower, G H.
, Black, J.
 B.
, A Turner, T J.
 Scrip(s in comprehension and memory.
 Cognilive Psychology.
 1979.
 II, 177220.
 Gibbs R W & Tenney, Y.
J.
 The concepi of scripts in unders(anding s(ories.
 Journal of Pscholinguisiic Research.
 1980,9.
275284.
 Graesser, A C.
 Gordon, S E .
 4 Sawyer, J.
 D.
 Recogni(ion memory for typical and a(ypical acdons in scrip(ed acdvides; Tes(s of a script poimer • (ag hypo(hesis.
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior.
 1979, 11.
319332 Graesser, A.
 C , Woll, S.
 B , Kowalski, D.
 J.
, & Smi(h.
 D.
 A.
 Memory for typical and atypical actions in scripted acdvies.
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: H u m a n Learning and Memory.
 1980.
 6, 503515.
 217 Lehnerl, W , O.
 Affect units and narrative summarization.
 Research Report »l79,Depl.
 of Computer Science, Yale University, 1980.
 Lehnert.
 W G .
 Black, J.
 B.
, & Reiser, B.
 J.
 Narrative summarization.
 Manuscript submitted to IJCAI, 1981.
 Miller, G.
 A.
 English verbs of motion: A case in semantics and lexical memory, in A.
 W.
 Melton & E.
 Martin (Eds.
), Coding Processes in Human Memory, Winston, 1972.
 PollardGott, L.
 P.
.
 McCloskey, M.
, & Todres, A K Subjective story structure.
 Discourse Processes, 1979, 2, 251281.
 Schank.
 R.
 C.
 Dynamic Memory: A Theory of Learning in Computers and People, in press.
 Schank, R.
 C.
 & Abelson, R.
 P Scripts, plans, goals, and understanding.
 Hillsdale, NJ: Eribaum, 1980.
 Schank R.
 C.
 A Riesbeck, C.
 K.
 (Eds.
) Inside computer understanding: Five programs plus miniatures.
 Hillsdale, NJ: Eribaum, 1981.
 218 Using Qualitative Simulation to fienerate Explanations Kenneth Forbus, Albert Stevens 1 Introduction An important goal of a computer aided instruction system is to provide students with understandable explanations.
 Generating explanations requires that the instructional system must itself have some understanding of the topic, prefereably close to the kind the student should have.
 There is a growing amount of evidence that human understanding of physical systems is based on qualitative models of those systems.
 This evidence comes from psychological studies [Larkin, McDermott, Simon & Simon, 1980, Stevens, Collins & Goldin, 1979] and is suppported by successes in artificial intelligence in actually constructing systems that reason about physical situations using qualitative models [deKleer, 1979a, Forbus, 1980].
 The sequence of events in such a simulation depends on how the components of the device are connected together; changes in one quantity can affect only those other quantities related to it through some sort of connection.
 This means that complex devices can be modelled by specifying how a set of component models are connected together.
 Once certain assumptions about the operation of the device are made, the effects of a change on one part can be found by local propagation through the component models of the device.
 This is the essence of the Incremental Qualitative (IQ) analysis formalized by deKleer for electronic circuits.
 The component models we have used so far are very simple.
 Spaces in a device are modelled by chambers, with ports and pipes transmitting pressure changes through them.
 Valves are modelled in terms of changes in their openings; when the valve opening increases, the pressure in the input side decreases and the pressure in the Consider the following explanation of an air operated pilot valve.
 As the controlled pressure (discharge pressure from the diaphragm control valve) increases, increased pressure would be applied to the diaphragm of the direct acting control pilot.
 The valve stem would be pushed down and the valve in the control pilot would be opened, thus sending an increased amount of operating air pressure from the control pilot to the top of the diaphragm control valve.
 The increased operating air pressure acting on the diaphragm of the valve would push the stem down and  since this is an upward seating valve  this action would open the diaphragm control valve still wider.
 [Bureau of Naval Personnel, 1970), p.
383.
 This explanation Is comprised of a set of events, each describing a qualitative change in some part of the device.
 The explanation is linearized and describes how physical effect is passed from one component to another.
 It ignores the true temporal changes; those things that are happening are happening continuously and simultaneously.
 I f ^ .
 Ji.
^i •> lTillH>Biil>niu.
t '̂  • .
 jV.
","":".
.
.
" /•, T! Ul ••••''.
1 ̂; .
•.
••• Explanations like the one above are an important component in teaching someone how a complex device works.
 This paper describes a computer system based on deKleer's incremental qualitative analysis techniques (deKleer, 1979b), that automatically generates such explanations.
 FIGURE 1 SUCCESSIVE FRAMES OF THE EXPLANATION GENERATED FOR A SPRINGLOADED REDUCING VALVE.
 2 An example explanation Figure 1 presents an explanation generated by our system.
 Each panel of the explanation is drawn from the actual computer display that a student sees.
 Successive panels denote successive states of the display.
 The device described is a springloaded reducing valve, a common type of control device which serves to supply steam at a constant reduced pressure to a set of varying loads.
 [fi:: "'•••\ • a^;'^^ 3 Incremental Qualitative Simulation The basic idea for a qualitative simulation comes from the observation that when trying to understand or explain a device (as above), people often use a description of how parts of it change when some influence is applied to the system.
 The changes in physical quantities such as pressure or the position of a valve are typically described by using the sign of the derivative of the change.
 Thus, for a pressure, the changes are "up", "down" oc "constant".
 n̂ iT! M ^ : ^ A T  '̂  V'^"! i r.
 1 / I 219 TABLE 1 1 i /1 ,.
 5* .
 THE COMPONENT MODELS CURRENTLY IMPLEMENTED.
 The conventions are: (1) <a> ==> <b> means "When <a> is known, set <b> to it".
 (2) <a> == <b> is equivalent to <a> ==> <b> and <b> ==> <a>.
 (3) Opposite(value) means "If value=D then U, else if value=U then D, else value" .
'' ' •A ;•.
• ; •|i output side increases, and when it shuts, the opposite happens.
 A translator models collections of components that turn the chanqe in one type of quantity into another (such as the diagphram/spring/valve stem combination that causes a change in pressure to change the position of a valve).
 Table 1 lists the component models we have implemented and their rules.
 The descriptions are expressed in the constraint language CONLAN, which is described in [Forbus, 1981).
 A qualitative simulation of a device is obtained by simply specifying a value from the IQ algebra for a selected part of the device (such as the output port for the spring reducer valve) and running the constraint interpreter on it.
 In this system the parameter is interpreted as the controlled parameter of the device.
 The interpreter deduces values for as many of the component quantities as it can by running the rules associated with the component models.
 It records the results of this qualitative simulation as a graph of the quantities, connected by the rules used to deduce them.
 This description of the history of the simulation is used as the basis for generating an explanation.
 The particular tutorial goal of this system is to explain feedback systems.
 Our system is capable of recognizing and explaining instances of negative feedback, positive feedback, stable, unstable and openloop systems.
 Recognition of the stability and type of feedback depends on two types of events that can occur within the constraint interpreter: clashes and coincidences.
 A clash occurs if some rule tries to set a quantity to a value different than a value obtained by another means.
 A coincidence occurs if a rule tries to set a quantity to the same value obtained by another means.
 Negative feedback is indicated by the constraint interpreter detecting a clash involving the controlled variable, and positive feedback by detecting a coincidence involving the controlled variable.
 The device is considered stable if making the controlled parameter constant results in a coincidence, and unstable if the result is a clash.
 If there are no clashes or coincidences the device is considered open loop.
 Obviously these judgements are not the most precise possible, but are in line with the fidelity of the underlying simulation.
 One Port Chamber Port pressure == Chamber pressure Two Port Chamber Portl pressure == Port2 pressure Portl pressure == Chamber pressure Three Port Chamber Portl pressure == Port2 pressure Port2 pressure == Port3 pressure Portl pressure == Chamber pressure Pipe Endl pressure == End2 pressure Continuous Valve If valve open then opening ==> input pressure down and output pressure up closing ==> input pressure up and output pressure down else opening ==> valve open (This assumes a nonzero flow) Translator If invert?=NO then input == output else Opposite(input) == output 4 Generating Explanations While the event structure of the qualitative simulation is similar to what appears to be naturally used by people, its internal form is not easy to understand.
 By translating it into English and using graphical cues it can be turned into a coherent explanation.
 This is accomplished by a simple grammar and template scheme which transforms the computation paths in the contraint network into an interleaved English and graphical presentation.
 Results of analyzing the simulation are handled in the same fashion.
 A stored template provides an English explanation of the results, filled in with the phrases that describe the particular events in the device under consideration that led to the conclusions.
 5 Conclusions We have demonstrated that it is possible to generate coherent understandable explanations of the operation of physical devices from a qualitative simulation of the device operation.
 The qualitative simulation and its subsequent analysis are very general.
 New devices can easily be added by specifying their component connectivity and the text and graphics functions for each part.
 220 The raost important point is that these techniques make possible learning environments in which students can experiment with complex devices and see explanations of the effects of various changes.
 This includes changes that could not be made easily with an actual device.
 One could even imagine constructing a "design laboratory" that enabled students to design and experiment with a device by putting together components.
 This kind of learning environment could enable students to quickly understand complex physical systems in ways currently possible only after laborious study.
 6 References Bureau of Naval Personnel.
 Principles of Naval Engineering.
 : U.
 S.
 Government Printing Office 1970.
 deKleer, J.
 Causal and Teleological Reasoning in Circuit Recognition.
 PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, September, 1979.
 deKleer, J.
 The origin and resolution of ambiguities in causal arguments.
 International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, August, 1979.
 Forbus, K.
 A Study of Qualitative and Geometric Knowledge in Reasoning about Motion, Master's thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, February, 1980.
 Forbus, K.
 A Conlan Pr imer.
 Technical Note ***, Navy Personnel Research and Development Center, 1981.
 Larkin, J.
, McDermott, J.
, Simon, D.
P.
 & Simon, H.
A.
 Expert and Novice Performance in Solving Physics Problems.
 Science, June 1980, 208, 13351342.
 Stevens, A.
, Collins, A.
, i Goldin, S.
 Misconceptions in students' understanding.
 Interriat ional Journal of ManMachine Studies, 1979, 11, 145156.
 221 INCENTIVE A^^) COGNITIVE PROCESSING Michael W, Eysenck Blmbeck College, London It has been found that performance on a large variety of tasks is enhanced when incentives (monetary or otherwise) are offered for high performance efficiency.
 Several possible theoretical explanations have been proposed to account for this effect.
 Edwin Locke has argued that incentives improve performance to the extent that they affect the individual's goalsetting; in contrast, Easterbrook claimed that incentives produced increased attentional selectivity with enhanced performance on the primary task being accompanied by reduced performance on a conciirrent secondary or subsidiary task.
 An influential theoretical position deriving from that of Easterbrook was put forward 10 years a.
go by Donald Broadbent.
 He pointed out that incentive often interacts with known arousers ('e.
g.
, white noise) in such a way as to suggest that incentive is itself an arouser.
 The implication is that various arousers, including incentive, are affecting the same arousal mechanism in very much the same way.
 In this connection, there is some evidence inclicating that incentivized subjects arc more p'r.
ysiolo.
pcally aro^.
sed than control subjects.
 One of the major limitations of the research in this area has been the failure to assess the effects of incentive on performance efficiency in a satisfactory manner.
 If incentive improves performance on a cognitive task, it does not necessarily follow that incentive has enhanced the efficiency with which all of the component processes involved in the performance of that task have been carried out.
 Indeed, it is even possible for an overall beneficial effect of incentive on the performance of a cognitive to mask an adverse effect of incentive on one or more of the component processes.
 The cognitive task used in our ongoing research program was selected in part because it permits identification and measurement of its salient component processes.
 It v;as also selected because the effects of one arouser (v;hite noise) on its performance have already been established by Hamilton and Hockey, thus permitting some evaluation of Broadbent's arousalbased interpretation of incentive effects.
 The task involves letter transformation; more specifically, the subject is given one, two, three, or four letters, and is asked to add either 2 or 4 letters to each of the original letters.
 Thus an example of a simple problem is 'C + 2', for which the correct answer is 'E', and an example of a relatively difficult problem is 'JEPG', for which the correct ansvfer is 'NITK'.
 For each problem, the subject must work out the entire answer before responding, V.
Tiat are the component processes involved in this lettertransformation task? \/hen a letter is presented, the first process involves accessing longterm memory, locating the alphabet, and then finding the appropriate starting point within the alphabet.
 The second stage of processing involves the carrying out of the transformation itself, and the third stage of processing involves the storage and organization of the partanswer.
 In the case of a fourletter problem, these three processing stages are repeated for each letter in turn.
 Thus, at least conceptually, we can subdivide the total time taken to solve a fourletter problem into 12 component stages.
 A fxHther advantage of this cognitive task is worth mentioning at this point.
 While it is often extremely difficult (or even impossible) to decide whether different taskprocessing activities occur serially or in parallel, it is virtually certain that 222 the component processes involved in the lettertransformation task are carried out seriatim.
 It is hard to see how the transformation stage could begin before the alphabet has been located in longterm memory, and it is equally difficult to believe that the answer to a letter could be stored while it is still being transformed.
 In the initial study in the current series, subjects r,rA_ix,t ̂ , minutes solvin^' each of 3 different versions of the task (l, 2, 3» or 4 letters, adding 2 or 4 ) .
 Incentive was a betweensubjects' factor, v/ith incentivized subjects being offered £5 (approximately 12 dollars) for obtaining an overall level of performance among the top 2'̂"/̂  of particiisating subjects, Nonincentivized subjects were offered no extra monetary payment over and above their normal payment for experimental participation.
 The results of this initial experiment were reasonably unequivocal, Thp incentivized subjects outperformed the nonincentivized subjects in each of the 8 task conditions, taking between Q̂f/o and 40^^ less time to solve each problem (the error rate was less than 5/' in all conditions'^.
 The only significant interaction was between incentive conditions and the number of letters in each problem; this interaction involved a systematic increase in the beneficial effect of incentive as the number of letters requiring processing increased.
 What do these results mean? In order to interpret the interaction between incentive conditions and number of letters per problem, we obviously need to have some understanding of the effects on the processing system of varying the number of letters.
 "erhaps the r:ajor effGct of i::creg.
sin,̂  the iiumber of letters in tne task i'3 to imrriHr,;: the uenands on come shortt'lTTi rtor;,,:̂  nystem v.
'liicr is involved in the storage and organization of the accmnulating partanswer.
 If so, then it may tentatively be concluded that monetary incentive increases the efficiency of a shortterm storage system.
 Of course, this cannot be the whole answer.
 Presumably oneletter problems make minimal demands on shortterm storage, and yet incentive increased performance speed considerably on such problems.
 The implication is that incentive also affects time to access longterm memory or transformation speed (or both).
 The second experinent in the series was ciesij3ned to clarify the precise effects of incentive on the lettertransformation task.
 Only fourletter rrcllems w^re usei (addinj 2 or ^ ) , and the presentation v/as on a lettertylette: basis.
 The following sequence of events occjrred on each trial: the subject pressed a key in order to present the first letter; he or z]'e '.
L.
e.
n dî .
̂ the tranirformalio'i aloud; trier.
, the subject nr̂ :,sed a >,.
nv i i order to pres'^ut the coccr;' letter; nd so on.
 jJach nubject 3;j£nt 40 .
r.
i.
:û '3s jcirr the task (20 niif.
jit'G on ei.
C'! v^ersion).
 Incen^i'e ••.
 ;'.
Kr:ipulat'''i ?.
s a be cweensubjects' factor, ith incentivized subjectc bein;; offered ^3 (^bout 12 dollars) for obtai/an;;; an overall level of perforT^ r:ce a.
'̂ ong the top 2'̂ ]' of t}ie c^ihjpcts.
 Nonincentivized subjects only receive! tl>iir normal payment ror attending the experiment.
 The firs step in th^ analysis of the dat^.
 v/as to calculate 12 intratask times.
 This was dene by measuring the time between the first key press and the start of the transformation (assumed to reflect access time to longterm storage), the time to perform the transformation out loud (transformation speed), and the time between the end of the transformation and the next key press (assumed to refledt storage and organization).
 These three times were obtained for each of the four letters.
 The error rate was again below 5 P^r cent.
 The major findings were quite straightforward.
 Incentive did not affect the time taken to access longterm storage, but did lead to increased transformation speed, especially when the add factor was 4 rather than 2, In 223 addition, incentive speeded up the time taken to perform storage and organization operations.
 This main effect was qualified by a significant interaction between incentive and letter position.
 In this interaction, the beneficial effects of monetary incentive were greatest daring storage and organization following transformation of the third letter.
 In general terms, the demands on shortterm storage capacity are likely to increase systematically with each additional letter.
 However, there is a reduced requirement for storage and organization following transformation of the fourth letter, since at that point the subject is in a position to output his or her answer to the problem.
 Accordingly, the interaction between incentive and letter position may be interpreted as reflecting the greater efficiency of some shortterm storage system under incentive conditions.
 It is interesting to compare the effects of monetary incentive and white noise on this task.
 Hajnilton and Hockey found that noise increased the speed of transformation but decreased the speed of storage and organization, V/hile more levels of noise and incentive must be sampled before any definite conclusions are possible, it is nevertheless interesting to note the rather different patterning of the effects of incentive and noise.
 In particular, incentive increases the speed of storage and organization, whereas noise decreases it.
 It is thus possible that noise and incentive should not be considered merely as equivalent arousing agents.
 In the third experiment in the series .
ve looked at the effects of distraction on the performance of the 4letter, add4 version of the lettertransformation task.
 The task was carried out in the presence of auditorily presented distracting stimuli (letters, numbers, or meaningless blips) which were presented on average one «very 5 seconds, or in the absence of distraction, There were three withinsubjects' incentive conditions: no incentive; £9 (about 20 dollars) distributed among the top Iffo of subjects on lowincentive trials; and ^70 (about 160 dollars) distributed among the top 2'i^ of subjects on highincentive trials.
 The session lasted approximately one hour.
 One of the reasons for investigating the effects of distraction was that Easterbrook argued that incentive leads to increased concentration on taskrelevant stimuli, v/hich seems to imply that incentive should reduce distractibility.
 An alternative possibility is that more of the available processing resources are invested in the task under incentive conditions.
 If the active rejection of intermittent distracting stimuli requires processing resources, then incentivized subjects might be more rather than less distractible.
 A further possibility is that incentive interacts v;ith type of distraction, so that incentive can either increase or decrease distractibility depending on the natvire of the distracting stimuli.
 The data from the third experiment, which are currently being analyzed, will provide answers to some of these issues.
 In sum, it is erroneous to assume that incentive produces an acrosstheboard improvement in all of the processing operations involved in the lettertransformation task.
 V/hat actually happens is that simple mental operations such as those involved in transformation are speeded up by incentive, and the efficiency of some shortterm store is improved.
 However, another processing operation (accessing longterm memory) is unaffected by incentive, perhaps because it is a relatively automatic skill.
 It is only by doing finei^rain analyses that one can obtain important information about the precise patterns of effects produced y incentive.
 The above findings have een obtained with the use of relatively odest incentives, of course.
 "ĵ'e ha,ve reliminary data su,^gesting tViat larger ncentives may produce either somewhat ifferent or very different results (as > ould obviously occur if one hundred housand dollars were offered for good erformance), 224 The Role of TAU» in Narratives Michael G.
 Dyer Computer Science Department Yale University, New Haven Ct' 1.
 Introduction People often rely upon common sayings, or adages, when asked to characterize stories (either by way of summarization, or title selection).
 What are people doing in such cases? Why do adages often serve as an effective way of characterizing a story, and how are people able to accomplish this? For instance, when asked to characterize the following story: MINISTER'S COMPlJiINT In a lengthy interview, Reverend X severely criticized President Carter for having "denigrated the office of president" and "legitimized pornography" by agreeing to be interviewed in Playboy magazine.
 The interview with Reverend X appeared in Penthouse magazine.
 readers often responded with adages such as: ADG1: The pot calling the kettle black.
 ADG2: Throwing stones when you live in a glass house.
 Clearly, these adages are an effective characterization of MINISTER'S COMPUINT.
 But how do we recognize this fact? By what process does an 'appropriate' adage come to mind, and to what purpose? Furthermore, when supplied with an adage and a context, some individuals experience remindings from episodes in their lives.
 For instance, one individual was first presented with the following: context: EDUCATION ADC3: Closing the barn door after the horse has escaped.
 and then asked to recall some episode from his life.
 He experienced this reminding: ACADEMIA Years ago, I was at University U1, where I could never get the facilities I needed for the research I wanted to do.
 So I decided to apply to University U2, which offered a much better research environment.
 When the chairman learned I had been accepted to U2 and was actually leaving U1, he offered to acquire the facilities I had wanted.
 By then, however, my mind was already made up.
 Several observations are worth making here: First, for adage ADG3 to have initialed this reminding, the ACADEMIA episode must have somehow been indexed in longterm memory in terms of some abstract situation charncterized by that adage.
 Furthermore, this indexing could not have had anything to do with the specific semantic content of the adage, since ADG3 ostensibly concerns a farmer, a horse and a barn door.
 In contrast, ACADEMIA involves a chairman, a researcher, and university facilities.
 'This work supported in part by the Advanced Research Projects Agency under contract N001475Cl11 and in part by the National Science Foundation under lontract IST7918463.
 To account for such phenomena, I will present a class of knowledge constructs, called TADs (Thematic Affect Units), which share similarities with other representational systems under development at Yale, such as Schank's TOPs 18] and Lchnert's Plot Units 1̂ 1 151.
 2.
 Thematic Affect Units TAUs were first developed in the context of BORIS (3) [2l, a computer program designed to read and answer questions about narratives that require the application and interaction of many different types of knowledge.
 In BORIS, TAUs serve a number of purposes: First, they allow BORIS to represent situations which are more abstract than those captured by scripts, plans, and goals as discussed in 17).
 Second, TAUs contain processing knowledge useful in dealing with the kinds of planning and expectation failures that characters often experience in narratives.
 Finally, TAUs also serve as episodic memory structures, since they organize events which involve similar kinds of planning failures.
 For more detail on the use of TAUs in narrat ivcs , see 111.
 In general, TAUs arise when expectation failures occur due to errors in planning.
 As such, they contain an abstracted planning structure, which represents situationoutcome patterns in terms of: (i) the plan used, (2) its intended effect, (3) why it failed, and (A) how to avoid (or recover) from that type of failure in the future.
 If we abstract out tliis planning structure from both the BARNDOOR and ACADEMIA episodes, we get the following TAU: TAUPOSTHOC (1) X has preservation goal G [7] active since enablement condition C unsatisfied (2) X knows a plan P that will keep G from failing by satisfying C.
 (3) X does not execute P and G fails.
 X attempts to recover from the failure of G by executing P.
 P fails since P is effective for C, but not in recovering from G's failure.
 (4) In the future, x must execute P when G is active and C is not satisfied.
 TAUPOSTHOC captures the kind of planning failure that occurred for both the farmer who lost his horse, and the chairman who lost a graduate student.
 If the ACADEMIA story were told to an actual farmer who had lost his horse under the same planning circumstances, that farmer might well be reminded of his own experience.
 Whether this occurs or not, however, depends upon what other episodes are in longterm memory and what features are shared between them.
 Notice, for instance, that both BARNDOOR and ACADEMIA share goals at some level.
 That is, both the farmer and the chairman had a goal requiring proximity on the part of another entity.
 Since these features are shared, one experience has a better chance of causing a reminding of the other to occur.
 For instance, the farmer would have recalled the HIRED HAND episode below before recalling the BARNDOOR episode because of their shared features: HIRED HAND The hired hand always wanted a raise, but the farmer would not grant it.
 Finally, the hired hand got an offer to work at a neighbor's farm.
 When the farmer found out, he offered the hired hand a nice raise, but it was too late.
 Thanks go to Tom Wolf and Marty Korsin for helping with some of the ideas presented here, and for being sources of remindings.
 225 Although these episodes (i.
e.
 HIRED HAND, ACADEHIA, BARNDOOR) share the same TAD, HIRED HAND and ACADEHIA have more indices in common.
 One possible organization for them appears below: TAUPOSTHOC (misusing avoidence plan as recovery plan) / \ / \ .
 .
 .
 Proximity failure / \ / \ Contractual Failure BARNDOOR / \ / \ ACADEHIA HIRED HAND In this way TAUs can account for crosscontextual remindings (as in the case of BARNDOOR and ACADEHIA).
 Episodes are often related in memory because they share the same abstract planning error even though they differ in content.
 However, crosscontextual remindings can occur only where episodes are organized under the same TAU, yet do not share content features.
 Where content is shared, the "closer" episode will be recalled.
^ Consider the following episode: IRANIAN EHBASSY While holding 52 US hostages in Iran, the Iranian government condemned the takeover, by terrorists, of its embassy in Great Britain.
 "This is a violation of international law", protested Iran.
 A reader was spontaneously reminded of this episode while reading HINISTER'S COHPLAINT (on page 1).
 Again, there is little in common between these stories at the content level.
 IRANIAN EHBASSY is about politics, while MINISTER'S COHPAINT is about pornography.
 However, at the abstract planning level, they both share the following TAU: TAUHYPOCRISY X is counterplanning against y X is trying to get a higher authority z to either block y's use of a plan P1 (or to punish y for having used P1) by claiming that P1 is an unethical plan y claims that x has used an unethical plan P2 similar to P1 therefore, x's strategy fails In the case of MINISTER'S COHPLAINT, x is Reverend R, y is President Carter, and the third party is 'public opinion'.
 In the case of IRANIAN EHBASSY, x is the Iranian militants, y is the British terrorists, and the third party is 'world opinion', such as the United Nations.
 As argued in [81, the reminding process is useful for this reason: Once a situation has caused one to be reminded of an episode, all of the expectations associated with that episode become available for use in making predictions about what will occur next.
 In the case of TAUs, their associated expectations include advice on either how to avoid making the error predicted by the TAU, or on what alternative plan can be used to recover from the error once it has been made.
 The ability to store crosscontextual episodes make TAUs very general and powerful mechanisms.
 Once ^Thif does not imply that BARNDOOR can't remind one of episodes unrelated to TAUPOSTHOC.
 Clearly, other indexing methods may be operating at the same time.
 The farmer may recall BARNDOOR simply in terms of "experiences I've had with horses".
 Of course, this kind of indexing can not lead to crosscontextual remindings .
 an episode has been indexed gnder a TAD, its recovery/avoidance heuristics become available for use in completely different situations.
 Thus, planning advice learned in one context can help processing in other contexts, if the experience was recognized in terms of an appropriate TAD in the first place.
 3.
 Bad Planning la Widespread An examination of adages reveals that many are concerned with planning failures.
 That is, adages advice us either how to recover from a failure, or how to recognize and thus avoid future failures.
 Often, this advice is given implicitly, simply by describing situations in which certain planning errors lead to goal failures.
 In most cases, adages capture what has been called metaplanning [10] — i.
e.
 planning advice on how to select or use plans in general.
 For example, some adages deal with the need for checking enablement conditions before plan execution: ADG4 Don't count your chickens before they're hatched.
 Other adages stress choosing less costly avoidance plans over more costly recovery plans: ADG5 A stitch in time saves nine.
 or weighing the risks involved with the goal to be achieved: ADC6 If it ain't broke, don't fix it.
 ADG7 The cure can be worse than the disease.
 Many plans require cooperation or coordination with others.
 This can simplify planning but complicate plan execution: ADG8 Two heads are better than one.
 ADG9 Two many cooks spoil the broth.
 Some plans involve selecting an appropriate agent: ADG10 The blind leading the blind.
 ADG11 Who pays the piper calls the tune.
 Timing, enablement conditions, cost, plan coordinations, and agents are just a few of the areas in which plans can go wrong.
 Other areas, for example, include counterplanning against a foe, ADG12 Cut off your nose to spite your face.
 anticipating planning failures when using high risk p1an s , ADG13 Don't burn bridges behind you.
 the timing of plans, ADG14 The early bird catches the worm.
 and tradeoffs between shortterm and longterm planning strategies: ADG15 If you can't lick 'em join 'em.
 ADG16 Don't bite the hand that feeds you.
 ADG17 Honesty is the best policy.
 ADG18 Live by the sword, die by the sword.
 Any story that involves these kinds of planning failures will end up being indexed under a TAU which contains abstract planning advice (and can be expressed in natural language by an adage.
) When a related story is read and indexed under that TAU, its associated adage may come to mind.
 For instance, a story about how a ghetto riot protesting bad economic conditions resulted in black businesses being burned, would be indexed under TAUGREATERHARH, with an adage such as ADG12 possibly coming to mind.
 Plans and plan failures cut across all knowledge domains.
 This is because we are always choosing plans, adjusting old plans to new situations, recovering from errors in planning, finding explanations for why a plan failed, etc.
 Furthermore, we have a large storehouse of heuristic plans, and 226 there are many ways a plan can go wrong; You can't execute one plan until you have the right enablements satisfied; plan components must be executed in the right order; plans require agents, etc.
 This large and complex domain serves as a perfect terrain in which to index many episodes.
 Many of these adages give what may appear to be superficial advice.
 It may seem strange that memories should be organized around such 'obvious' rules for planning, but then again, how often do we fail in our plans because we have violated some adage? How often, for instance, have we failed because we acted before we planned? ("Look before you leap.
") How many times have we gotten into trouble for being late? When have we initiated a plan, only to discover we had miscalculated the amount of effort (or the sideeffects) involved? ("Easier said than done.
") How often have we delayed executing a simple plan, only later having to execute a more costly plan? The answer is: "very often".
 These adages are common because they point out the kinds of planning errors people are always naking.
 By definition, plans which failed were "bad" plans.
 Good planners at the very least follow the general planning advice represented in the adages of their culture.
 4.
 TAU Implementation The recognition of TAUs is complex.
 Clearly, goals and plans must be tracked.
 In many cases there is also an affect component.
 For instance, in TAUPOSTHOC it is the futility of the recovery plan, combined with the sense of "if only I had done things differently" that helps provide an access "key" to this TAO.
 So far the BORIS project has emphasized the use of TAUb in narrative comprehension.
 Much work remains to be done in modeling remindings during comprehension.
 This is important for extracting the 'moral' or point of a story.
 A computer program which can only answer questions of fact about IRANIAN EMBASSY, such as: Q: How many Americans are being held in Iran? A: Fiftytwo.
 Q: Who seized the Iranian embassy in Britain? A: Terrorists.
 Q: What did the Iranians do? A: They protested the takeover.
 is missing the point of why the IRANIAN EMBASSY is of interest.
 The point of IRANIAN EMBASSY is TAUHYPOCRISY, and that's where it should be remembered in longterm memory (rather than just under "things I know about Iran", or "embassy events X have read").
 b.
 TAU Experiments What is the psychological validity of TAUs? Do people have TAUs "in their heads" and, if so, how do they use them? Some initial exploratory experiments by Seifert |91 in the Yale psychology department indicate that people use TAUs to organize narratives.
 In one experiment, subjects read groups of stories each sharing the same TAU, but differing in content.
 Subjects were able to generate new stories, using completely different contexts, yet capturing the same planning structure specified by each TAU.
 In a followup experiment, different subjects were asked to sort the resulting stories generated from the first experiment.
 A cluster analysis [6] revealed a strong tendency for subjects to sort stories together by TAUs.
 Where stories shared the same content (but not the same TAUs) they were still grouped by TAUs.
 6.
 CoDclusions In this paper I have presented a class of knowledge constructs, called TAUs, which are related to TOPs [81 and PLOT UNlTs [51.
 I have argued that TAUs organize episodes around failures in planning, and as such, TAUs account for at least one form of crosscontextual reminding phenomena.
 Furthermore, TAUs have adages associated with them, which express avoidance and/or recovery advice available once the TAU has been accessed.
 Since stories are indexed in terms of planning errors, this information often captures the moral or point of a story.
 [11 [2] 13) [4] 15) [6) (7) (8) (9) (10) REFERENCES Dyer, Michael G.
 Thematic Affect Units and Their Use in Narratives.
 paper submitted to IJCAI81, 1981.
 Dyer, Michael G.
 InDepth Understanding: A Computer Model of Memory for Narrative Comprehension.
 PhD Thesis, Computer Science Department, Yale University, (forthcoming).
 Lehnert, Wendy G.
, Dyer, Michael G.
, Johnson Peter N.
, Yang, C.
 J.
, and Steve Harley.
 BORIS — An Experiment in InDepth Understanding of Narratives.
 Technical Report 188, Yale University.
 Dept.
 of Computer Science, 1980.
 Lehnert, W.
 G.
 Affect Units and Narrative Summarization.
 Technical Report 179, Yale University.
 Dept.
 of Computer Science, 1980.
 Lehnert, Wendy G.
 Plot Units and Narrative Summarization.
 Cognitive Science, in press.
 Reiser, Brian J.
, Lehnert, Wendy G.
, and Black, John B.
 Plot Units and the Understanding of Narratives.
 Cognitive Science Technical Report, Yale University (in preparation).
 Schank, Roger C.
 and Abelson, Robert.
 Scripts, Plans, Goals, and Understanding.
 Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, New Jersey, 1977.
 The Artificial Intelligence Series.
 Schank, Roger C.
 Language and Cognitive Science 4(3), July, 1980.
 Memory .
 Seifert, Colleen.
 Preliminary Experiments on TAUs.
 unpublished manuscript.
 Psychology Dept.
 Yale University, 1981.
 Wilensky, Robert.
 MetaPlanning: Representing and Using Knowledge About Planning in Problem Solving and Natural Language Understanding.
 Technical Report Memo.
 No.
 UCB/ERL M80/33, Electronics Research Lab.
 Engineering College University of California, Berkley, 1980.
 227 CONTROLLING PARSING BY PASSING MESSAGES Brian Phillips & James Hendler Texas Instruments, Inc.
 1.
0 INTRODUCTION The functional segmentation of linguistic knowledge, into rules about form and rules about meaning, has been vital in unravelling the complexities of language.
 Ho»ever, it does not follow that the process of analysis will respect the same boundaries and so the very segmentation that provided the insights can be troublesome when one seê ŝ to create a dynamic model of language.
 Here we are concerned with how linguistic knowledge is used rather than what knowledge is used.
 The study of process is one of the contributions of a computational linguistics to the study of language (Hays, 1971).
 Improper control strategies result in one of the apparent paradoxes of current knowledgebased systems: the more knowledgeable they are, the more inefficient they become.
 The systems are unable to handle the combinatorial explosion of possibilities that searches of the knowledge space produce.
 This situation is obviously counter to intuition, and to human behavior: more knowledgeable systems should perform better.
 We believe that a language understanding system should have the ability to bring syntactic and semantic knowledge to bear on the analysis at many points in the computation.
 This enables it to resolve the alternatives as soon as possible and prevent the flow of extraneous analyses to later phases.
 Existing conceptual analyzers fall into three major categories: linear control parsers (Woods & Kaplan, 1971), semantic grammars (Hendrix, 1977), and semantic analyzers (Schank, 1975).
 None permits the flexible, datagoverned interaction of syntax and semantics.
 to communicating, problemsolving (Hewitt, 1976).
 Our approach to creating such a model is use the notion of a society of knowledgebased, experts, called "actors" These actors can communicate by passing messages to any other actor in the system.
 This flexible control structure allows actors at any level of the analysis to interact with actors at other levels.
 The routing of information in the system is determined by the content of the linguistic act, thus achieving a datadriven control structure.
 The ability to direct information to the actor that needs it, is expected to improve efficiency.
 Each subsystem in language contributes to the process of understanding, but often offers several different views of the data.
 In our scheme, actors communicate to achieve a mutually consistent analysis, out of which comes an understanding of the data.
 The capabilities of each actor are determined by the functional segmentation, e.
g.
, an actor can have the ability to use constituent rules that describe the structure of a noun phrase, thus retaining this important facet of linguistic theory.
 2.
0 DESIGN FEATURES In the system we are trying to achieve several other design goals in addition to the gain in efficiency: We agree with Schank ( goal of analysis is not to tree.
 It should not even be the case in systems that parse tree, then per interpretation.
 The parse considered a data struc constructed incidentally to can be constructed if it i syntax cannot be ignored; it in determining antecedents of example.
 1975) that the produce a parse a subgoal, as is first produce a form semantic tree should be ture that is the analysis, or s needed.
 But is often useful preforms, for Schank's (1975) hypothesis of semantic prediction appears to be a good approach.
 But one cannot always have expectations.
 We envisage a system that can flow into a predictive mode when the situation is appropriate, with a default control structure of syntaxthensemantics.
 The output of the system should be semantic description of the input as instantiated caseframes.
 The novelty of the situation is captured by the way in which these caseframes are linked and by their spatiotemporal settings.
 The semantic description augments the encyclopedia, the store of world knowledge, and is thus available as pragmatic knowledge in the continuing analysis of the input.
 3.
0 THE ACTORS Most of our actors are "experts" on aspects of the primitive organizing principles of syntax and of semantics.
 They become associated with domain knowledge, i.
e.
, the grammar of a language, or world knowledge for a problem area.
 The job of an actor is to instantiate a model it has been given (topdown analysis), or if it was not given a model, then to find a model (bottomup analysis).
 The process of instantiation is performed by eliciting information from other actors that can use their expertise on the problem; they, of course, may have to consult still other actors.
 3.
1 The Syntactic Experts The organizing principle of syntax is constituency; the principal actor in syntax thus uses the constituency rules of the grammar to associate words into higher level constructs.
 The constituent actor recognizes syntactic constructions primarily by matching words to syntactic rules using the dictionary entries of words to determine their syntactic categories.
 3.
2 The Semantic Experts The primitive organizing conceptual knowledge are contingency.
 seguence, equivpi «>n̂ «, (Phil: how 1 • a v/»nrMn\f principles of relations of enablement.
 nar*—whnl e .
 etc.
 3W r 228 export, for example, knows how to ukp "continqpncy", "sequence", and "enahle" 1 inks.
 3.
3 Translation Experts The actors have peculiar to t iiier,!;aqos may req tcrminoloqy of receiver.
 Take, between clause actors (CFA).
 Th subject, object, user, event, tate special actors in vocabularies that are heir domains.
 Therefore, uiro translation from the the sender to that of the for example, messaqes actors (CLA) and caseframe e former uses concepts like and verb, whereas the latter aqent, etc.
 There are the system to handle this.
 r, .
0 OTIIKR TOPICS It is our belief that ou cndtrol structure can improved efficiency.
 Seve difficult problems in procer,sinq come about due t different types of knowledq boar at the same time.
 One understandinq of the bas messaqe passinq we would li phenomena as: •i.
l Robustness r messaqepassing yield more than ral of the more natural lanquaqe o the inability of e to be brouqlit to e we have a better ic principles of ke to look at such 4.
0 A fragmi;nt of an analysis Wp will show how the system analyzes: (1) The loft front tire is flat.
 (2) I wil1 chanqe it.
 and determines the referent of "it" in (2).
 The qoal of the syrtem is to create a roeaninq representation by instantiatinq a CF.
 Tlitouqh equivalency and partwhole relations, a CF can be equivalent to a complex of CF's; ĥiis the toplevel instantiation may be achieved by instant latino the lower rank CF's.
 A CFA normally has a model of a CF that it is tryinq to instantiate.
 Initially this cannot be the case and the system has to revert to a bottomup approach.
 The CFA rends a messaqe to the CLA requestinq that it be sent a translation of a syntactic analysis of .
1 clause.
 The CLA has to find a clause usinq the rules of the qrammar in.
 A series of instances of the constituent actor are invoked to analyze the rules.
 As they process the rules, they simultaneously notify an "input actor" of the terminal categories that they have encountered.
 When all necessary constituents have been expanded, the constituent actors are halted, waiting to know which of the parse paths miqht be consistent with the input.
 The input actor prompts the user for a word.
 It then sends messages to constituent actors to cause the deletion of paths inconsistent with the input and then messages to those constituent actors that still have valid paths.
 Effectively there is parallel processing synchronized by the input.
 When a clause, i.
e.
, (1), has been found, a translation can be sent to the caseframe expert, but firpt it must be translated as discussed in the previous section.
 A request is sent to the transl.
i t ion expert from the clause expert.
 This translation can be sent to the caseframe expert directly.
 The CFA next knows to ask Chronology for the NEXTEVENT.
 Chronology predicts that "chanqe tire" will be the next act.
 The Chronology Expert now passes this information back to the CFA.
 The CFA has now processed the first case frame to the best of its abilities and sets out to instantiate the prediction.
 It is now working in a topdown manner.
 when the prediction is passed to the CLA and translated, "tire" will be available as a match for the pronoun "it".
 Rather than having a predefined selection of rules to relax (Sondheimer & Weischedel, 1980), or using exhaustive backtracking, we believe that with message passing we can use the nature and context of errors to seek information from other actors on ways of circumventing the impasse.
 5.
2 Noun Groups Oftfound noun groups s the Select Commission Refugee Policy" are fra the unwary natural Examples like these led conclude "Both linguist are required for cor handling of noun groups for "the advantages application of both without separating understanding into sy stages.
" (p.
 57) 5.
3 Parallelism uch as "The staff of on Immigration and ught with perils for language processor.
 Gershman (1979) to ic and world knowledge rect and efficient He went on to argue of the simultaneous kinds of knowledge, the process of ntactic and semantic The origins of the actor methodology are in an investigation of parallel processing.
 Kornfeld (1979) has pointed out an interesting phenomenon, "combinatorial implosion," in communicating systems.
 In his example,a parallel and communicating search algorithm dramatically reduces the time behavior, even when the algorithm is run in a pseudoparallei, timesliced environment.
 One of our overwhelming interests is to find whether this behavior is manifest in language understanding systems written using the actor methodology.
 6.
0 BIBLIOGRAPHY Gershman, A.
V.
 KnowledgeBased Parsing.
 (Yale University Research Report #156.
) New Haven: Yale University, 1979.
 Hays, n.
G.
 The field and scope of computational linguistics.
 Proceedi ngs of the Intern̂ at iqnâ l Con̂ f̂ er̂ n̂ e on Linguist ics.
 Computational 1971.
 " Debrecen, Hendrix, G.
G.
 Human engineering for applied natural language processing.
 Proceedings of the 5th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
 Cambridge, 1977.
 Hewitt, C.
 Viewing control structures as patterns of passing messages.
 (MIT AI 229 Memo 410.
) Cambridge: MIT AI Laboratory, 1976.
 Kornfeld, w.
A.
 Using parallel processing for problem solving.
 AI Memo 561.
 Cambridge: MIT AI Laboratory, 1979.
 Phillips, B.
 A model for knowledge and its application discourse analysis.
 American Journal of Computational Linguistics, 1978, Microfiche 82.
 Schank, R.
C.
 Conceptual Information Processing.
 New York: American Elsevier, 1975.
 Sondheimer, N.
K.
, & Weischedel, R.
M.
 A rule based approach to illformed input.
 Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Tokyo, 1980.
 Pp.
 4653.
 ; Woods, W.
A.
, & Kaplan, R.
M.
 The Lunar Sciences natural language information system.
 (BBN Report No.
 2265.
) Cambridge: Bolt Beranek & Newman, 1971.
 230 A P A R S E R W I T H SOM^HIIING F O R E V E R Y O N E * 2.
 Maodlin^ Ungramraalical Sentences Eugene Charniak Uepl.
 of Computer Science.
 Brown University ABSTRACT We present d syntactic parsrr.
 Poragram.
 which tries to occomrnodale three goals First it will parse, in n natural way, urgraminatical sentences Secondly, it aspires to 'capture the relevant generalizations'", as in transfornalional grammar, and thus its rules are in virtual onetoone correspondence with typical transformational rules Fir.
ally.
 it promises to be reasonably ericirrt.
 especially giver certain limited parallel processing capabilities 1.
 Introduction Syntactic parsing in Artificial Intelligence (AI) has always had its share of controversies Many in Ai have seen in this work "much wasted e(Tort"[4) and suggested that "the heavily hierarchical syntax analyses of yesteryear may not be necessary" [6], At the same time, syntactic parsers have been attacked by those in linguistics as "devoid of any principles which could serve as even a basis for a serious scientific theory of human linguistic behavior" [2] And.
 while psychologists have been kinder, any psychologist must be uncomfortable with theories which, if taken literally, would predict that people cannot understand ungrammatical sentences — a prediction which are false.
 In this paper we will propose a parser, named "Paragram".
 which goes some way to answering this criticism In particular 1) The parser is "semigrammatiear' in the sense that it takes a standard 'correct" grammar of English and applies it so long as it can.
 but will accept sentences which do not fit the grammar, while noting in which ways the sentences arc deviant Thus it will parse (1) while still using grammatical rules for subject/vorb agreement to distinguish (2) from (3).
 (1) 'The boys is dying ' (2) The fish is dying (3) The fish arc dying 2) The rules of the parser are intended to capture the relevant generalizations about language in much the some way as a good transformational grammar I'aragram's rules are nearly in onetoone correspondence with those proposed in some versions of transformational grammar ' Despite the fact that augmented transition network (ATN) parsers are based upon transformational grammar.
 when examined closely typical ATN grammars [7] seem to bo far from the above ideal 3) The parser is reasonably efficient.
 (0 3 seconds/word for a group of test sentences) and would be very efficient if implemented on a machine With limited parallelism, so that the rules of the grammar all test the input in parallel, but only one IS actually applied (estimated .
04 seconds/word) lifTiciency aspects will not be discussed further in this paper 2.
1.
 Why We Need a Delerministic Parser Paragram is based upon Marcus's parser "Parsifal"[3] We will explain Parsifal shortly, but first let us explain why we chose it as a starting point Probably the best known parser in AI today is Woods' ATN parser [7] However it would not be possible to base a Paragram type parser upon the ATN parsing model.
 To see why this is so.
 we need only consider that when Paragram finds an ungrammatical situation, it must simply recognize it as .
̂ uch.
 and continue as best it can ATS's simply do not work this way When an ATN finds an ungrammatical situation it lakes it as evidence that it made an incorrect decision earlier in the sentence, and hence backs up to find the correct path So.
 consider (4) Jack sold the ball (5) Jack sold Sue the ball.
 Suppose that an ATN parser initially decides to parse "Sue" in (5) as a direct object, just like "the ball" in (4) When it gets to the second noun phrase in (5), "the ball" it has no way to handle it.
 and hence it backs up and tries making "Sue" into a dative which has been moved before the direct object But suppose we had the ungrammatical sentence.
 Mack sold Sue ball.
 Here the ATN would back up as well, but to no avail, since there is no way to get a grammatical sentence out o thiŝ " In a deterministic parser (one which does not bacl' up) the parser may assume that it has parsed cverylhinf correctly up to the point whore it runs into trouble Thus Parsifal knows where the trouble lies It is this pro perty which makes it an ideal starting point foi Paragram 2.
2.
 Parsifal Parsifal has two basic data structures, a stack and a bufTer The stack contains the sentence constituents on which it IS still working If a constituent is complete.
 then it must reside in one of two places first, it may simply hang off some larger constituent So at the end of a sentence there is only one item on the slack, the lopmosl s node, and everything else hangs off it.
 Second.
 Parsifal may have a complete constituent, but not know yel where il should go Such constituents are put in the buffer which is a storage area of limited size.
 An obvious example would be an individual word (which is clearly complete).
 A less obvious example would be a noun phrase which, while complete, might be attached at any one of several places in the tree Rules in Parsifal are of the typical situation/action type To decide if it is applicable, a rule will most often look to see what is in the bufTer.
 although, with some limitations, rules may also look at the stack Two positions m the slack are special, the bottom of the slack, which IS named c, and the lowest sentence node in I he stack, which is named s To lake a simple example, in Parsifal the rule for recognizing passive constructions is this (rule passivcaux :Th.
e rulp tx named ptn^sivpmix [= be) [= en| • :ll lonkx at fin;! two hujfi'n; Attach Isl Lo c .
/( pv.
la the "be" on the bntlitm.
a? passive.
) .
rnnsl node of the stock.
 Thi« IS fin 'x'endcd abstract of 8 much !on/̂ cr pnucr by t̂ c Sfime nnme.
 nviulnblc from the nuthor My 'hank^ lo Cr.
icrnc H,rst, wlio commented on the orjRfi.
il paper This res<fjch wds sĵ jpo'led in pa""', ay the Oflicc of Navn ficsrarcn jndcr conlrnct N000M7ftC0')93.
 and in part by the N'otionui Sc.
ence Founda'.
;.
jri under contrac: S"'HOin6flO U.
nlcss we exp!.
<'illy ndicMle lo ' ne contrary, this and a!) othc examples m this paper can be handled by l'a»i/'ai' When an example ts iincammatical.
 ''.
•ira*»'am wi" rc<of'iizc 11 .
ts su(h, bul poduce a reasonable deep si • jc',j<' ' anyway j'thenore .
' w.
i' i.
id.
'ito what in tne vcnience a d d not i;!«e ^Ve w.
ll be usiriR a vcsion of transfo'national Rnrmiir which wa current, in the late sxt.
rs.
 'he prn nr.
\ caion 'o' ''its tho^re ,s it familiarity.
 It siiojld not be assumed 'lal Paragram mjs.
 necessarii use n groin mar u' this type "*F jrl.
fKmore ;hc time it takes an ATN to decide that the sentencIS onganmatical sho.
ild go up roup,hly exponentially with the numbe of words "or some reason, those who tout ATNs as a model of huma pcfomGnrc do not draw much attention to this 'prediction' 231 The two squarebracket groupings indicate what the rule requires in the first and second bufler In particular, the " = " indicates that what appears in the corresponding buffer must have the feature spcciflcd, such as being a form of the verb "be" Everything following the "»" is the action portion of the rule These actions are specified in a language called "Pidgin", which is quite restricted but formulated to look like English Suppose we were applying this rule in the course of processing the sentence Jack was taken to the house At the point where passiveaux is applicable, the slate of the parser would be as follows STACK BUFFERS Jack was ta.
kerj j£_ Here the np "Jack" has been made a constituent of the top level sentence, but it is hanging ofT to the side to indicate that it is no longer on the stack, since it is a completed constituent In the course of testing, Parsifal will see that "was" is a form of the verb "to be", while "taken" is an "en" form of the verb "to take" and thus the buffers match the rule test.
 At this point the action would be executed, which is to put the "was" on the aux which is currently the node Parsifal is working on This will have the side effect of removing the "was" from the buffer, at which point the words further along in the sentence will move in to replace those which have been removed from the buffer However, not all rules of the grammar will actually be tested at any given point Indeed most of the rules would be completely irrelevant; while parsing the auxiliaries of a verb we would hardly expect to find direct objects To prevent Parsifal from even looking, each of its rules IS found in one or more "packets" and only the rules which are in "active" packets will be tried The active packets are those which are attached to the bottom node of the stack, c Should this node be removed, the packets on the next higher node will be active.
 The idea is that if Parsifal is working on a noun phrase, then noun phrase rules will be active.
 Once Parsifal is done with it.
 it will be removed from the stack, and the rules on the next higher uncompleted constituent, say a verb phrase, will become active once more Which packets are attached to a given node is explicitly controlled by the grammar rules themselves.
 There are complications to this scheme, but this should due to give the reader a basic idea of how Parsifal works 2.
3.
 Parsing Ungrammatical Sentences Naturally, Parsifal as currently constructed will only parse grammatical sentences Should it be given an ungrammatical sentence, it will eventually come to a point where no rule applies, and it will simply give up Paragram differs from Parsifal in numerous ways, but allowing for ungrammatical input requires only a comparatively minor modification Whereas Parsifal rules are tried sequentially until one works, active Paragram rules are to be thought of as being tested in parallel.
 Naturally, on current computers, they are really being tried sequentially, but it is useful to think of them as working in parallel Furthermore, unlike Parsifal, the result of a test in Paragram is not a yes/no decision Rather it is a numerical "goodness rating" whuch, the higher the number, the belter the fit between the rule and the buffer/stack Paragram then takes the rule with the highest number and runs it, allowing it to change the stack and buffers It then repeats the process The goodness rating of a rule is the sum of the values returned by the rule's atomic tests.
 Each atomic test will add to the score if it succeeds, and subtract if not.
 No significance should be attached to the actual numbers The basic idea is that the more tests succeeding, the higher the score, and failure is punished severely.
 Now the crucial point in all of this is that for an ungrammatical sentence, the various ratings that we will get at the point of ungrammaticality will all be quite low, since none of the rules of grammar will exactly match the input.
 Nevertheless, one rule must still have the highest score, and hence will apply, even though il does not really approve of the sentence as given.
* So.
 for example, •The boys is dying.
 will be given a low rating when Paragram starts to parse the auxiliary "is", at which point the best rule will be: (rule subjeclverbagreement in parseaux [= verb] [test: The np of s agrees with 1st.
] • Create an aux.
 Activate buildaux.
) When applied to the above ungrammatical sentence this rule will have a poor goodnessofftt rating since there is a match with verb, but the subject/verb agreement fails Nevertheless, this is the best value at that point, so the rule IS used anyway, and Paragram starts parsing the auxiliary verb, as intuitively it should.
 Note however that with sentences like The fish is dying.
 The fish are dying, the above rule will succeed in each case, and in the process specify that the word "fish" is to be understood as singular and plural respectively.
 Some other ungrammatical sentences handled by Paragram are •Bill sold Sue book •Jack wants go to the store.
 There are however, many ungrammatical.
 yet understandable, constructs which Paragram cannot currently handle For example, extra constituents give it a problem.
 So more work needs to be done 3.
 Parsing the Relevant Generalizations The second goal set out for Paragram is that it caplure appropriate generalizations about language in much the same way as a good transformational grammar This has proved an elusive goal in parsing programs The most well known of Al parsers.
 Woods's ATN parser, has been based upon transformational grammar, and Bresnan [l] points out that one could use the ATN framework to provide the link needed between her "realistic" grammar of English and an actual performance model of parsing Nevertheless, while ATNs are inspired by transformational grammar, the single extended ATN grammar 1 have seen often required several specialcase rules to handle what is a single rule in transformational grammar While we will not pursue this point in any detail, let us take a single example, taken from the ATN grammar for English given in [7] The rule of thereinsertion in transformational grammar relates sentences like these: There were barnacles on the ship Y/ere there barnacles on the ship? The ship on which there were barnacles sank The ship there wore barnacles on sank * The statement of the rule is something like this: *There is stiU the possibility of ties.
 However in practice this has not come up, and it can be arpued that baring problems with the basic idea of detcrmjnistic parsing, ties should simply not occur.
 Ŝtylistically t}iis ain't so hot, but presumably it is grammatical.
 At any rate, the ATN grammar has a rule to handle it.
 232 np(der) exisl^erb • There existverb n p .
 Th\s rule handles all cases of unstressed "there" (as opposed to the "there" in "There is Jack") However.
 Woods's ATN has tour separate rules for lhercHnscrlion one for handling each of the above cases So.
 despite the inspiration of transformational g r a m m a r , this A l \ grafnmar has not done as well as one would like in the elegance of the rules it embodies °  Now in m a n y respects.
 Parsifal does belter In particular, it needs only one rule of Ihereinsorlion But this is not to say thai all of Parsifal's rules are this elegant Indued, of thn b7 or so niies ujh.
ich I have.
 looked at in depth from the detailed grammar at the end of MoTCiis' book '3\.
 only tivenly nr xn correspond to trarusformaltonal rules Of the rest they may be categorized into Ihreo groups, depending on the particular deficiencies which required them to appear m the grammar MiRcellancous problems Six of the rules are needed because of various peculiarities of the grammar and the parser While some of these arc interesting in their own right, (particularly two.
 which deal with the rule of raising, a controversial rule in Linguistics) we shall say no more about them here Phrase Structure Rules The majorily of the 31 other rules.
 21 in all.
 are there because Parsifal mu'^l have explicit rules in its grammar for thn placement of phrase structure ronslilucnts Thus, a rule like s * np vp IS implemented by four separate rules in the grammar one for creating an s when needed, one for attaching the np at the right spot, another for the vp.
 and finally one which says to slop parsing the s Not only would it would be preferable to have a single rule, but the packet mechanism in Parsifal is really a phrase structure mechanism in disguise, thus these twenty one rules are redundant, at least in principle Paragram solves this problem by explicitly using phrase structure rules to handle packet switching, as well as replace many of the aforementioned rules However, it has not proved possible as of yet to replace the rules which create new constituents of the appropriate type This is because such rules typically differ widely from one another in what they are looking for in the buffer to clue them in that the new constituent is needed These creation rules are currently the only rules which are nol in onetoone correspondence with typical transformation.
il rules irhmovomcnl Next, the ten remaining rules are involved in the implementation of the whmovcmcnL rule, as used in Who did Jack give the ball to'' Some of these rules are needed because Parsifal has two sets of verbphrase rules There is a normal set.
 which handles most verb phrases, but as soon as we must worry about gaps, wo have a completely different set This second set differ from the first in two ways First.
 because they must worry about gaps, this second set continually checks the semantics to insure that it has not gone astray In fact, there are cases where it is only semantics that can tell the parser what to do For example What did Rob give the girP Who did Bob give the book''' Second, this second set contain many rules, each looking for a different configuration of things in the buffer which.
 in turn, will suggest where to locale the "gap" left behind by whmovcmenl **IL IS inipormnt.
 howcvnr.
 to keep in mind I'lp djsi nclion 'i<>'.
wcen Iimilntions in the prt.
''Re[ nnd limilQ'.
ion̂  in I'lc piirLit ulfl' p^om^nr.
 It IS possible that a more e ever RramTiar wrner niiKht have ovo dcd this problem Indeed Woods fins cla 'red Tpersonal eominunication) that Parisrai IS siriiply one kj'id o' ATN 7h s nuiy ̂ e so.
 but only m •.
 'le uninleresLinp sense Ihiu both are one knid o' Tjrinp maehine In partjculnr.
 the o'i:y ways I can .
see of s:riiulatinft Pasi'n with un A^N would eomplctely ,/;:iore ai! of the bui.
i.
n fen; iircs thai 'iMlte A" Ns wfia; : ley a.
'e.
 Al any rate, if i' s true that Parsifa' is one kind of A N *.
'len u mjs sjre!v be Ihe case thn'.
 .
iny ;Tprovcmen'.
 in !*ars,fill's grammar over a particular ATN fi'omipar must only indicate deCie'encies m ''le ATN Rrammnr.
 'rhere are two exceptions, due to problen^ i ojr h.
nd.
 ir of daUvcmovcment Paragram does without all of this by making two changes in the parsing mechanism The first is a technical change in the way the parser decides to postulate that rt wh might have been moved from a particular location The second, and perhaps m o r e interesting change.
 IS to avoid needing two sets of verbphrase rules (with and without calls to semantics) Paragram always checks to see if a constituent is semantically reasonable before it will add it to the syntactic tree Note that the user need not explicitly specify that a call to semantics IS required here Rather Paragram automatically adds such calls to the testing section of any rule which adds a constituent to the tree ' 4.
 Conclusion While we have given no reason to take Paragram seriously as a model of h u m a n cognition, if we were to do so we would want answers to two important questions First and foremost, how does syntax fits into the overall parsing process'' Paragram essentially takes the conservative view that syntax is the initial mechanism which takes the word string and produces as its output some "deeper" representation that has properties that m a k e it useful for the further pragmatic processing It differs slightly from this however in that it requires that semantic? be performed on a constituent before it can be attached to the tree.
 Once we have decided to adopt a model in which syntactic analysis is done, and done as a separate profess, we must then answer the second major question what is the relation of the syntactic parsing process to standard "competence" models of syntax'' Again, Paragram takes the old fashion view that this relationship IS reasonably direct Paragram argues that it m a y be possible to have a onetoone correspondence between parsing rules and rules of g r a m m a r in a parser which IS computationally efficient These views were, of course, very c o m m o n in the sixties.
 They are less c o m m o n now.
 in part because of various psychological results such as those of Slobin |5) It IS not m y intent to try to refute the interpretation placed upon these results.
 Rather I hope that the existence of Parsers like Paragram can reopen the debate on these crucial subjects References 1 Joan Bresnan, "A Realistic Transformational Grammar," in Linguistic Theory and Psychological Reality, ed M Halle.
 J.
 Uresnan, and G Miller, M I T Press, Cambridge Mass.
 (1978) 3.
 B Elan Dresher and Norbert Hornstein.
 "On S o m e Supposed Contributions of Artificial Intelligence to the Scientific Study of Language," Cognition.
 (4) pp.
 321396 (1976) 3.
 Mitchell P Marcus.
 A Theory of Syntactic Recognition for Natural Language.
 M I.
T Press.
 Cambridge, f/ass, (1980), 4.
 Christopher K Riesbeck, "Computational Understanding," pp 1115 in l^oceedings of the First Workshop on Theoretical Issu.
es in Natural hangiiage l^ocessing.
 cd.
 R Schank and B L NashWcbber.
 (1975).
 5.
 Dan 1 Slobin, "Grammatical Transformations and Sentence Comprehension in Childhood and Adulthood," Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behamar b pp 219227 (1966) 6 Yorick Wilks "An Intelligent Analyzer and Understandcr of Knglish" Commumcn.
tions of the A C M 10;',) pp 264274 (1975) 7.
 William A Woods.
 "An Experimental Parsing System for Transition Network Grammars, ' pp, ]131!)'» in Natural Language Processing, ed R Rustin, Algonthmics Press, New York (1 972) 233 http://Issu.
esThought Sequences and The Language of Consciousness Benny Shanon Department of Psychology The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel.
 Consider the following episode, to be referred to as (1): It Is early evening.
 I am on my way back from the supermarket, and I pass through a small public garden.
 "It is a shamt that I cannot pick some flowers for H.
 , because it is dark," I think to myself.
 It occurs to me, however, that "but it is possible to buy" (flowers, that is), and I note tliat "she will enjoy me bringing her some".
 Consequently, I decide to "buy", I turn back and I go back to tlie supermarket in order to purchase some flowers.
 The episode is the story of one thought sequence.
 Sequences of this type, I presume, are familiar to everybody.
 At various occasions we find that a thought is "passing in our heads": There is a trigger, several phraselike expressions follow, and • then one feels a break, an end.
 In the previous paragraph, the thought sequence is triggered by the sight of the bushes; it consists of four thought states (marked by Inverted commas), and it terminates with a call for action.
 This form is general, thought sequences are cognitive entities characterized by beginning and end points which are welldemarcated and between which there is an ordered series of discreet steps that usually consist of linguisticlike thought expressions.
 The present paper is a brief report on a few patterns revealed in a comprehensive investigation of a large corpus of tliought sequences I have collected over a period of several years.
 Such an investigation is interesting, I believe, because thought sequences constitute a natural cognitive kind, a genuine expression of the workings of the mind, not a reaction imposed on it by the demands of an artificial task (other such natural kinds are linguistic expressions, commonsensical inferences and dreams).
 The corpus was collected by means of introspection.
 Willie in some paradigms of modern psychology, the method of introspection lias been regarded as "tlie most fundamental of all the postulates of psychology" "what we have to rely on first and foremost and always" (James, in the Principles of Psychology), the method is commonly regarded as nonscientific and unreliable.
 Such a critical judgement, I think, stems from misappreciation of the appropriate usages of the method, and a failure to distinguish them from its abuses.
 The most notorious of all critiques of introspection have been raised in response to the research conducted in Wurzburg at the beginning of the century.
 The members of the Wiirzburg school used introspection as a method for the direct solution of psychological issues.
 They believed that in order to find out how concepts are represented and processed, it is sufficient to look inside one's head and to observe.
 If one is perceptive, careful and experienced enough, one is bound to find a factual answer to the issue at hand (the Wurzburgian subjects, recall, were the leading psychologists of their time).
 Introspection, however cannot be used for the direct solution of psychological issues and the generation of theories, but only for the collection of data.
 The analysis and modelling that ensue do not depend on introspectionj in the present case they are conducted in a manner employed in the linguistic study of texts.
 As a consequence, the investigation is objective in the sense that it need not be confined to the study of one person, the one who had furnished the sequences.
 In fact, the study is based on the analysis of sequences furnished by several informants, and no significant individual variations were noted.
 The use of Introspection does require precautions.
 In order to safeguard against contaminations of memory and Interpretation, all the sequences in the corpus were collected at the very time of their occurance.
 More important, however, are the analytical (not the technical) precautions.
 The employment of introspection sets limit.
ntions on the perspective by which the corpus may be examined.
 Clearly, there is no way to compare the thought expressions to any pure thoughts which underly them.
 Hence the analysis cannot deal with the structure of individual thought expressions, but only with the patterns which are exhibited by entire sequences These patterns are to be evaluated in terms of intrinsic coherence, not extrinsic correspondence.
 In fact, the present corpus exhibits both a systematic coherence and a completeness in that at present the probability for any new sequence to reveal a pattern not already specified In the model is close to nil.
 That the topic of the investigation is sequences of thought expressions, not thoughts in any pure form, need not be viewed as a shortcoming.
 On the contrary the formulation of expressions in an inner code, which is very much like a natural language is itself a cognitive phenomenon.
 Clearly, not all thought processes are amenable to introspection: reaction time psychology, as well as psychoanalysis, attest to this fact.
 On the other hand, however, it is conceivable that the human mind would have been ( nizant only of thought states which have practic; ramifications, such as the call for action which terminates sequence (1).
 That the degree of reso; utlon exhibited by thought sequences is of intermediate order is itself of cognitive significanci Following this line of reasoning, the study of thought sequences by means of introspection cum linguistic analysis may be viewed not as the 11m ed study of the shadows of thoughts, but as the genuine study of the language whose totality constitutes human consciousness.
 From the present perspective the grammar of the language of consciousness is the set of mappings defined by the sequences of thought expressions.
 Local mappings define the relationship between V successive states in a sequence, but it appears that the history of the sequence is itself a det minant of its progression and that global mappin also need to be postulated in the grammar.
 For lack of space, only general patterns regarding t local mappings will be noted.
 The different local mappings, it was found, cons tute different patterns defined on a small numbe of parameters.
 Most significant of these is the level serving as the basis for the mapping.
 Loca operations may be based on the relating of thoug expressions by means of stored links, content, structure or particular symbols.
 The first of th bases defines associations.
 Associations relate items in stored representation by means of a lin which is also stored.
 Associations vary accordin to the types of the representation they relate, the scopes associated with them.
 Representations may be lexical, semantic, episodic, phonological modalityspecific, or motor; whereas scopes may volve one constituent, several constituents, or tire thought expressions.
 Traditionally, the tei "association" has been used to refer to lexicallexical mappings of a unitary scope.
 In the pres corpus, however, instances of all possible assoc lations were encountered.
 (2) for instance, is s example of an association relating one constltut in the perceptual domain to one entire episodic phrase.
 234 (2) 0.
 Hearing a tune.
 1.
 N.
 Introduced me to this singer.
 Content operations relate thoug.
it states on the basis of one's knowledge of tlie world.
 The item! related by the mapping may thetrselves be either stored or generated.
 Tlie operations may either supply further information regarding a given ite specify similar information regarding otiier items.
 Formal operations relate thoueht expreRsions by form, not content, henc.
 they are most useful in tlie generation of new Information.
 They include: negation, interrogation, generalization, specification and conversion.
 While the terms noted are familiar from logic, the operations they denote are more general than the traditional formal ones.
 Generalization, for instance, is an entire family of operations, which vary according to the parameter and scope of both domain and range.
 (3) is a fragmeat in which two applications of generalization are noted; the domains and ranges of each appreciation are underlined: (3) 1.
 to ask R.
 about it 2.
 to ask adults about it 3.
 to_conduct exgerinients_on_adults.
 The move from "ask about" to "conduct experiments", note,would not be classified as generalization in traditional treatises.
 Lastly, operations wliose basis is the particular symbol Involve a shift in the perspective (reading or Jevel) by which the given thought ex|)ression Is processed.
 Hero are two examples: (^) 0.
 Rating spaghetti with a spoon.
 1.
 Wl\y isn't there a tool that will keep the noodles and let tiie liquid pass.
 2.
 fork In (li) the shift is from the definition of the symbol to Its specification, whereas (5) the shift is from one reading of a given string to another.
 (.
')) 0.
 (reading) I draw my finger across her forehead.
 1.
 An image of myself drawing my finger across I,.
's forehead.
 The typology of local operations is only one fare of the study of tliougltt sequences.
 The richness of the thought machine, it appears, is a product not of the possession of a rich repertory of many, complex operations, but rather of the rapidity and flexibility of their dynamics.
 MosI notably the following cluster of patterns will be noted: a) tach constituent of a tliought expression is a fii;:zy designator, which may trigger a thought operation through its different aspects, some of which may be only partially specified.
 b) The sequencing of mappings is driven by siiifts of scope whereby a thougitt expression may be generated via one constituent, but serve as the basis for another expression via another.
 c) Similarly, shifts of levels are encountered.
 Some shifts are recursive, whereby the very application of an operation serves as the trigger for the next state in tlie sequence.
 d) Throughout, the application of operations involves interactions, both amongst themselves and iJlth other psychological modules.
 Together, these patterns suggest the metaphor exemplified by the following episode (for me, an habitual pattern): I am at the top of a steep rocky slope.
 I have to descend it, but 1 am afraid.
 My solution is to run down as fast as I can.
 I jump from one stone to another, and by avoiding being stationed at any one of them, 1 manage to transverse the entire route through them.
 Returning to the cognitive domain, this cascade pattern seems to be the one that enables not only the processing of given information, but also its generation de novo.
 235 http://thoug.
itWhat conditions srould a theory of consciousness me«"t? Bernard J.
 Baars SUNY Stony ftook M s paper is written in the ncmviolion that theories of consciousness today .
tto in the same situation that semantic theories w'>rr in a decade ago.
 At that time tr.
ere was a widespread belief that semantics was an essentiTlly in.
̂ oluble puzzle, that much more data wouU' have to be collected to constrain adequate tfory.
 In the event, it turned out that the real obstacles were conceptual rather tr.
an empirical .
 Oice the actual conditions to be met by an adequate semantics are specified, the theoretical options are vastly reduced.
 Further, condition? on semantic theory were not difficult to find: all such theories must be able to handle discourse reference, paraphrase generation, question answering, the detection of anomaly and contradiction, and the ability to resolve ambiguities at all levels of analysis.
 Until people looked at these actual constraints, no progress could be made.
 ani the problem was treated as insoluble.
 Similai'ly, until we actually look at widelyaccepted constraints on tl.
eory of consciousness, th" topic will be treated as fuzzy, mystical, and insoluble.
 Wrat are the conditions for an adequate treory of consciousness? First, we can specify some pretheoretlcal criteria; 1.
 An adaptive construct .
 Conscj^iisn«ss should be treated as a cognitive construct much like any otr.
er, witr.
 an adaptive informationprocess inp, function.
 2.
 Relationship to oti.
er constructs .
 Th.
e proposed construct srould be distin^t frrxn others, but explicitly related to perception, memory, intentionality, executive fun';lions, automaticity, availability, the "internal monologue", tr.
e subjective observer, and especially attention.
 3.
 Wr.
at is UNconscious? A tr.
e.
'ry .
f consciousness should give a (principled) explanation of the difference between consciou>^ inri iin"nscious processes.
 1.
 Respect for commonsense r^vcholof.
v .
 There is a world of difference between h?Dtstrapping one's way beyond common sense ai1 hlindly Ignoring it.
 Common sense is our starting point, and we cannot even ask about the nature of consciousness without it.
 5.
 Empirical reference .
 Finally, a clear, empiricallybased domain should be specified.
 Tables 1 and 2 show a number of contrasting pairs ol claims about similar conscious and unccnscious processes.
 Th.
ese claims command a wide cons<:;sus among psychologists.
 Tr.
e job of theory is th'>n to fit some explanatory model to the constraints in the simplest possible way.
 Table 1: Capability Constraints on a theory of conscious contents.
 Conscious Processes vs.
 Unconscious processors 1.
 Computationally Highly efficient in inefficient.
 specializer/ tasks.
 2.
 Great range, h Limited domains K relational capacity.
 relative autonomy.
 3.
 Apparent unity.
 Very diverne, parallel, serial ity, i limited and togetr.
«>r have capacity.
 great capacity.
 Table 1 shows some Capability Constraints , which indicate the capacities and limitations of conscious vs.
 unconscious phenomena.
 For example, if we use the term "computational efficiency" to mean the ability to work out some algoritrjn quickly and without error, it is clear that wholly conscious processes are not computationally efficient.
 Even simple addition or subtraction is performed slowly and with a good chance of error.
 It appears that the great bulk of fart and efficient processing is done by a large set of specialized processors.
 Ihere is much neurophysiological evidence to this effect as well (Geschwind, 1979).
 Ih.
e great range and diversity of conscious contents seems to compenate for these efficiency limits.
 People can be conscious of virtually any energy pattern impinging upon any sensory system, down to single protons hitting single visual rece tors.
 By means of conscious biofeedback, one can gain voluntary control over the actions of twoneuron spinal motor units.
 Etc.
 Or one can be conscious of events that require enornoos coopera tive activity between many millions of neurons.
 Further, conscious contents always appear internally consistent at any one time, even if this consistency is spurious.
 This Is in apreemen with the fact that conscious capacity is limited and that the contents o^ conscious ness appear serially .
 These facts belong together: If there must be internal consistency at any one time, then there is a clear capacity limit for incorporating mutually inconsistent contents, and such mutually exclusive contents must also appear serially.
 In contrast to conscious processes, th^re is reason to think that unconscious proi'cssors can operate autonomously in their specialized dr.
nains without difficulty, because they are isolated from each other.
 Tney seem to be highly diverse, operating fast, efficiently, and in parallel.
 Taken as a whole, the set of all unconscious specialpurpose processors has a very great capacity Indeed.
 Tnese Capability Constraints have led me to associate consciousness with a wellknovvn informationprocessing configuration: A global database, operating in a very large, distributed system, fee global data base is essentially a central information exchange which p̂ rmits otherwise autonomous specialized processors to interact with each other.
 Representations in the global data base are globally distributed, so that any one of a myriad specialists can respond to the global information, and some set of specialists can cooperate in return to create another global representation.
 In this system, global processes are inefficient, slow, and errorprone because they require cooperation between different s^ts of specialists.
 Yet global information will have great range, diversity and contextsensitivity precisely because it involves interaction between many specialized processors in the system.
 Global information will show apparent unity, because inconsistent global representations will lead to competition between mutually exclusive specialists, which will cause the global representation to become rapidly unstable.
 Tĥ ere will tr.
us be a narrowly limited capacity to display mutually competitive contents at any one time, nnd these will have to be displayed serially.
 In this way, all the Capability Constraints of lable 1 can t>e shown to apply to global representations in a distributed system.
 But this is not the whole story.
 236 Table 2: Boundary constraints o:vn w.
" contents of consciousness.
 ConsciOLiS pr.
er r'^mena 'Ji'iiul Igneous oases: 1.
 Percepts.
 2.
 Input consistent witr.
 context.
 Djacf.
ronic cases: 3.
 Percepts.
 14.
 Any cf.
ange in a l.
abituated stimulus.
 Unconsci'^us pr.
fiioniena orp.
nni7" i" opi s.
 Input ini;oristr>nl witr.
 cont"x' .
 Prep'^'^fptual procesjir,.
 Habitu.
it"f| percept.
 Consider the consciousunconscious contrasts in Table 2, entitled Boundary Constraints — a welli'.
:i3wn set ol lactr> 3'>out percepti:)n.
 I'"i ,jepts are conscious, but tr.
e rapid prepercptuTl r.
ypoth.
esistestinp, tr.
i', is needed to ".
"tablisr.
 the conscious percept is unconscious.
 FurtK^i'nne.
 the p̂ ,ysical stimuli that lead to the cMn.
'Moiis percepts are only conscious if they ar" •Icfin^d within a stable set of contextual constraints.
 These contextual constraints are n«>'>'ied to provide tr.
e presuppositional background for the percpts, and tr.
ey are not conscious.
 Ir.
r pr.
ysical stimuli tr.
emselves are not conyc i>u.
 "Ither if the appropriate contextual back?,rou:id is missinp.
 Further, percepts tr.
at are Ir.
oiou'.
r.
ly analyzed drop out of consciousness (hnbituation and automaticity).
 Ih:ese facts imply that conscious contents involve more than just global information.
 IV.
ey need to be stable and coherent , to accomodate the fact that rapid preperceptual pro° ssing is not conscious.
 Further, for a global representation to be conscious, it must be able to trigger widespread adaption in the nervous system — once this adaptation has occurred, th°  conscious percept becomes unconscious, presumably because it has now become a part of the stable, presuppositional background.
 To put it all tof^ether, then: conscious contents must be global , coherent, and informative .
 A first approximation to a system that fits these constraints is shown in Figure 1.
 Figure 1 Globally Dlstributetl Information: CONSCIOUS CONTENTS Conscious contents are not only globs], hut als coherent, because internally inconsistent ^nntents would imply competition between differe^t s'ts of specialists.
 Any active competition vrjuld rapidly remove the incoherent representation fnn fr.
e global data base.
 Figuie 2 presents a more refined sy«;t°ii to fit the constraints set out in Tables i .
tv) 2, Figure 2.
 ENERGY PATTERNS f f f * f INFORMATION Globally Distributed Adaptina Specialists Stable Contextual Specialists Tne global representation is now shown to be bounded by a set of stable contextual ?pecialists which provide the presuppositions within which the global representation is defined.
 However tr.
e contextual specialists are not themselves conscious.
 Other specialists are in the process of adapting to the global representation.
 Once a^Japtation is complete, the global representation fTlrr (rom consciousness; it becomes part of the contextual background, thoup,h it • mtinu's to constrain other conscious contents.
 This final model can handle all the major empirical constraints on theory listed above: Conscious contents must be global, internally coherent, and informative (i.
e.
, able to trigger widespread adaptation).
 Tris theoretical approach is tr' )t.
"d in much greater detail in Baars (in press) and IViar s and Mattson (in press).
 Baars, B.
J.
 Conscious contents provide the nervous system with coherent, global infoi mition.
 In R.
J.
 Davidson, G.
 Schwartz, and P.
 f^.
aplro (eds.
) Consciousness and selfregulat ion Vol.
 n i , NY: Plenun, in press.
 Baars, B.
J.
 and Mattson, M.
E.
 Consciousness and intention: A framework and some evidenr^e.
 Cognition 4 Rrain Theory , In press.
 Geschwind, N.
 Specializations of the f.
tnan brain.
 Scientific American.
 ^11 Jj) .
 IT^Q, 180?01.
 Spacloll i«d Syit«ms (Urtcensc lout ) Note that conscious contents ai " plohally available, but most detailed information r' ••"'"ssing is performed locally by a large .
'"t of specialized, distributed processors.
 Ih" ?r"ialIzed processors maintain the processmp ini' iative.
 237 THE ROLE OF THE OBSERVER IN COGNITIVE SCIENCE.
 Rlcluird H.
immcrslcy.
* TliL' current phi losoplilcal bnsls of cognitive science leads to problems In the theories of cognition proposed.
 An .
iitern.
it Ivc basis, using phenoraonology, may be more viiible.
 Western metaphysics has been divided between dualists and monists.
 Both equate self and mind.
 Cognition is the relation between the self or mind and the worid or the rest of the world.
 Cognition requires a world and a mental representation of that world.
 Unfortunally we cannot be sure of the worid.
 Any variety of realism requires some representation of the world.
 Theorising becomes the relation of on model to another.
 Because of our preju dices we lend to ascribe one of these models reality.
 The subjects of our theorising arc taken to possess representations of this world.
 We deduce the nature of their representations, and the processes necessary to gain these representations upon the assumption that our "observers world" is real.
 In fact what we take to be properties of the subject may be imposed by the n.
iture of the assumptions within tlie observer's worid.
 Phenomonoiogy equates the world with the self (e.
g.
 Merleju Ponty 19(>2, 1964).
 My world Is myself.
 Mind is a p.
iri of myself whicli I have learned to contrast to the real.
 R.
itl>er than trying to control one's own subjectivity, as an observer, one must understand it.
 There is no real world to base one's cognitive models on.
 Instead one must consider the relationship between worlds.
 What cannot be communicated cannot be studied.
 As researchers we devise many ways for subjects to communicate with us.
 It is a mistake to ignore their roie in this communication.
 As cognitive scientists we should consider the worlds of subjects.
 To do this wc must abandon our privilogej position as "objective" observers.
 Wc have struggled to objectify our analyses of behaviour and otiier manifestations of cognition, this attempt is spurious.
 We will only progress by devising ways of recording and relating subjective worlds.
 This may look as if it will be very difficult, and further, nonobjectivc.
 The remainder of this paper argues that 1.
 Current cognitive science theorising is already nonobjective and th.
it this poses a serious problem.
 2.
 This problem must be faced by making the role of tf  observer explicit in tlieory.
 Let me provide examples of I .
 I hope that th.
:̂y will be clear enough to allow you to generate others.
 Let me take a psychological example, a linguistic example and an A.
 1 .
 example.
 For psychology, consider the concept of imagery In particular and mental rcpresen tation in general.
 The intial interest in imagery was fairly simplistic, early studies sought to discover if there were any ipparent performance correlates of a mental image.
 Reports of imagery were correlated with performance in one way or another.
 It has since become clear that reporting an image correlates with some analogue kinds performance especially in terras of "distance" traversed over time.
 It has also become clear tliat reported imagery is not necessary for such effects (Friedman 1979) and tliat use of "the image" is not like use of an object (Hinton 1980, Richman and Mitchell 1979).
 So wc now have representations which are like images, but clearly cannot correlate precisely with Imagery reports.
 The problems of interpreting the original observed performances have not been solved.
 It is not clear what the basis of imagery reports or time differences in processing are.
 The assumptions that time differences represent real processing and that reported Imagery has some Imaginal (e.
g.
 analogue) basis are part of the observer's or theorist's world.
 I suggest that the observers have found evidence wtiich supports tlieir world.
 They have not found evidence which would convince their more cynical colleagues.
 By wading into such exciting problems as imagery, without being clear what they believe an image could be, cognitive psychologists have produced a lot of experiments which are unlnterpretable.
 You can like them or dislike them but is is unclear what they have shown.
 The image as a concept may be a useful part of the observer's world, it Is not clear, and cannot be without the distinction, whether it is a useful part of the subject's world, or even a functional entity within the processing system.
 Space prevents me going Into detail for the other examples.
 I'll just name them to annoy and tease those who believe In them.
 In Al the notion of a representation of knowledge seems to be a formal 1 sat ion of the observer's knowledge, it is not a theory of knowledge in Itself.
 In linguistics the notion of a language Is part of the observer's/community world.
 It Is not clear that It is an essential part of linguistic theory.
 Need one assume the object of study to understand it? It would be better to derive it.
 How will considering the role of the observer help to solve such problems? For a start, it becomes clear tliat there arc no "bald facts" which we all agree about as decent and upright scientists.
 For example, proimagery people seem to believe In the reality of images, linguists believe in language.
 For some purposes these beliefs may be useful, they cannot be validated by assuming them.
 Nor can the existence of such things be proven.
 If we want to understand the mind of a subject, rather than simply capturing behaviour In a descriptive way, then we have the problem that their beliefs and ours may be different.
 Supposing one found "imagery effects" in a person who reported no imagery.
 The current way of understanding this would be to claim that the person liad an unconscious Image.
 It Is important to recognise that this is a claim about our worid, not the subjects.
 For example it might be futile to tell such a subject to "picture" something, other ways of enabling "imagery" might be necessary.
 Tlie Ideal, if we wish to study the minds of others, would be some model which both observer and subject could agree on, or at least be made to agree on.
 One role of science is to establish such an agreement within a scientific community.
 For example, Human Information Processing has certain agreements about how to consider psychology.
 A critical notion is that of information.
 Recently, we have seen criticisms by Gibson (e.
g 1966) and Turvey (e.
g.
 1977) of the assumption that there is some absolute way of defining units of information in the enviroment.
 Their alternative becomes subject relative.
 1 suggest that this is too simple.
 The "primitive units of information" in the envlroraent will depend upon the subject, the enviromental context, the historical context of the subject and, not least important, the way in wliich the observer characterises the problem of interest.
 That is, the notion of invariance only has meaning within a system which includes the observer, the subject and the enviroment.
 An affordance, like edible, or a feature, like straight line, can only be specified in this m.
inner.
 The fact that they appear "real" invariants to us is due to our Ignorance about our participation in this process.
 You may protest that by Including our participation in science, we are liable to destroy the objective and repcatable nature of science.
 Clearly the functional utility of several sciences, or better, systems of scientific communication, is great.
 It is not clear that this is the case in cognitive science.
 I am proposing that cognition be reg.
irded as a relation between the world of the observer and tlie world of the subject, rather than as a static system which can be charted and understood as processing within a single world.
 1 believe that this will oveicome the problems with using phenoraonology as tlie basis merely for Introspection or some uncritical description of people's beliefs.
 1 am suggesting using two phenomonoiogies at once.
 The relation between those worlds will serve as the basis for cognitive science, rather than attempting to base one world in 238 http://iitern.
ithttp://th.
itthe other, iis is presently done.
 As o glib sumranry to rcmcrabLr: What is roiil is not import int, what the subject and the observer believe to be real is critical.
 References.
 Friedman A.
 1978.
 Memorial comparisons without the mind's eye.
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Beh.
iviour.
 _1_7 .
^27^^44.
 Gibson J.
J.
 1966.
 The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems.
 llinton G.
 1979.
 Some demonstrations of the effects of struttur.
il descriptions in mental imsgcry.
 Cogni t ive Science.
 J 2J125U.
 MerleauPonty M.
 1962.
 The Plienomonolugy of Percep tlon.
 RKP.
 MerleauPonty M.
 1964.
 Philosophy and Sociology.
 In Signs.
 Northwestern University Press.
 Kichman L.
L.
 and Mitchell U.
B.
 1979.
 Mental travel: some reservations.
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance.
 5.
 1318.
 Turvey M.
T.
 1977.
 Preliminaries to a theory of action with reference to vision.
 In Pc rce i vlng Acting and Knowing.
 Ed.
 K.
 Shaw and J.
B.
 Hransford.
 LEA.
 ~ •Progr.
im in Cognitive .
Science.
 UCSD C009, La Jol la, Ca 92U9).
 239 Are We Ready for a Cognitive Engineering? S.
 K.
 CaRII.
 Xerox Polo Alio Research Center A N D A.
 NliWtLL, CamefiiMellon Untyenlly ll IS an interesting irony that psychology is often criliciicd for its impracticaUty and its concern with minutiae while at the same lime the crucial problems impeding m a n y engineering developments are problems of psychological performance.
 N o w h e r e is this more Inre than in the area of humancomputer interaction, whether it is a matter of automation in the cockpit of advanced aircraft or in the tasks of office workers.
 In both cases it is the lack of understanding of the determinants of psychological performance in the user that currently sets limits on the use of technology.
 Yet, anyone w h o has had the task of trying to obtain from the literature psychological guidance for the design of an interactive computer system is aware of the great frustrations engendered by the jumble of empirical results and microtheories, tightly bound to expenmental paradigms, which he finds.
 It is not that psychology has no information to offer.
 Indeed, while the literature admittedly contains quantities of illfounded trivia, there has c o m e to be established in cognitive psychology a solid set of verified facts about the working of the h u m a n mind.
 Hut these facts arc difficult lo retrieve and to apply in new circumstances.
 This is true partially because in psychology, unlike some other fields, there has been insufficient effort devoted lo codifying and condensing the knowledge learned into simple forms, usable by workers with other specialties.
 ITic codification and simplification of established facts is important to the progress of science if the results from one specially are to become ihe tools of another (Latour and Woolgar, 1979), if the results of cognitive psychology arc to coalesce into a science base for cognitive engineering.
 Uut are w e ready for a cognitive engineering? Is it n o w within our reach to create a systematic methodology for designing machines optimized for h u m a n cognitive performance? ITiere is certainly the engineering need and there arc also the promising developments in cognitive psychology, but it is a great mistake to think that, by merely listing a miscellaneous collection of results, cognitive psychology is thereby rendered usable to support a discipline of cogniuve engineering.
 W h a t is required is a more radical departure from what is usual in psychological research.
 Whereas the point of expenmental manipulations is often to discriminate between competing theories no matter h o w smiill the discrimination, by contrast in a psychology useful for engineering design, small differences are lost in the m a n y approximations always necessary.
 W h a t is imponant is the ability to do task analysis (determining Ihe specific, rational means of accomplishing various goals), calculation (zeroparameter predictions of behavior capable of parametric variation), and approximation (simplification of the task and of psychological theory).
 In the remainder of this paper, we wish to suggest a way in which numerous results from cognitive psychology might be included in a single model, usable by computer system designers and others.
 T h o u g h limited, this model (wliich we sh.
ill dub the Model H u m a n Processor) docs m a k e it possible to cal'.
ul.
iic predictions of user performance, albeit of an approximate kind.
 Ilic purpose of the model is not to provide a precise dcscnpl on of what is in the head, but to provide an economical and sufficient basis for applied analysis.
 THE MODEL HUMAN PROCESSOR The MiiJd lluiii.
in l'nn.
> vui i.
iii l)e dixribcd by (1) ,i set of vMlii 1^1 .
 ti vl 1111111.
1, i 1 I n,^i.
iuiin" tlijiii.
 .
•'I.
 Ili^ piiii.
ii.
.
il properties of the processors and memories arc summarized by a small sel of parameters.
 A similar technique has proved successful for simplifying the analysis of electronic informationprocessing systems (sec Sicwiorek, llcll, and N e w c H , 1981).
 I'he m e m o r y parameters used in Ihe njodel arc are /I.
 the storage capacity in items, S.
 the decay lime (halflife) of an item, and K.
 the main code type (iconic, acoustic, visual, semantic).
 The only processor parameter used is T, the cycle lime.
 The complete model is elaborated and argued in Card, Moran, and Newell (in preparation).
 Here, w e wish only lo give an illustration of h o w a single parameter t from the model can be used to suppon system engineering analysis.
 According to the Model H u m a n Processor, the mind is comprised of three partially coupled processors, the Perceptual Processor, the Cognitive Processor, and the Motor Processor, each with a similar cycle time, derived from the literature.
 >.
.
  uwTERii nmouY I 'Vli6 WOniOHS MEMgRy >*„= 3L''"̂ 'l *̂"' rbwftc Figure 1.
 Tha Model Human Proeesso*—Memon««.
 ; proc«9S0», end B«slc Pxncipio o( Op«r*lron.
 Srnw^ Wi(ofm«rion noi «>m Wrtoq Mrmoî  tmoo* the PxoiHun' PiotCMor I Md)w (»OM<a'n> ••» v' •" mui« iitj.
,i.
 .
iit̂olion o< c>«.
>ki « «wfcu«, Mr^Mf Wortaig Mrw»f convMa 0« «£(.
.
»l*( el'.
in»i •" looq 'if" tJrww» ViuJl ln>»0» Slwa And Aîfcio.
, fnsr St.
— ct hi irio.
,TB» ;» ai *<:.
•( .
rlw.
hort o( M ••P("<c<1<.
il aflO •nnJoflit ffup"!! •* y" '~l Sililo'r •"••r's Ih bavt.
 PimCW* tt ODL'OI'm g( thf MoiMI Human Piotrisir •* !!'• FJccnjnue Act ejrcH at na On Mfl crew <•>* c<H"Bi| 0 mvtirtq UcnoT »''>•— •Oon* w*o(ij"'«i kitftf 10 I'̂'i I" loig r*"n fcmi'T ̂  tK m lutn.
 mo0*r M« ccnam* of Wotii'̂  Utmo't Pi.
 Variable Perceptual Froceisor Rate Principle.
 The Perceptual Processor 0xU time T varies inversely mth stimulus intensity.
 P2.
 hncoding Specificity Principle.
 Specific encoding operations performed on what is prrnnrd Jeiermine ŷ haf is stored and what is stored determines what retrieval cues are rffrciive in providing access to what ts stored P3.
 lUscrimination Principle.
 The dijficulty of memory retrieval is determined by the candidates that exist in the memory, relative to the retrieval clues.
 P4.
 Variable Cognitive Processor Rate Principle.
 The Cognitive Processor cycle lime r is shorter for greater task demands and increased information loads; it also diminishes îfh practice.
 P5.
 fills s Imw.
 The lime T 10 move the hand to a target of size S which lies a distance Dnnm Kgiven by Tpo^^'M^^H^^^^^^ ^''^'^^ 'w~ 100ins/biM70~ 120nis/bit).
 /U Power Law of Practice.
 The nmcT^ to perform a lask on the nth trial follows a power law: T^== r^n '.
 where r 4[ 2 6].
 P7.
 The Uncertainty Principle.
 Decision time T increases with uncertainty about the Judgement or decision to be modt • T ~ l^li, where It is the informationtheoretic entropy of the decision and />.
= 150 ms/bil |0157 ms/bitj.
 Tor n equally probably alternatives (Hick s Imw).
 11 = logj (n + 1) For n alternatives with different probabilities of occurring P.
 // = ;',log2(I/;»y + 1).
 P8.
 Maiionality Principle.
 A person acts so as to attain his goals through rational action, given the structure of the task and his inputs of information and bounded by limitations on his knowledge and processing ability: Goals + Task + Operators + Inputs + Knowledge + Processlimits —* Behavior.
 P9.
 rhe ProblemSpace Principle.
 I he rational activiiv in which people engage to solve a problem can be described in terms of (I) a set of slates of knowledge (2) operators for chanfinK one state into anoiher.
 (J) constraints on operator movement, and(4) control knowledge for deciding which operator to apply next Figure 2.
 Operation.
 The Modet Human Processoi—Addllional Principles of 240 Tp = 100 ms (50200) T^ = 100 ms (25170 msj Tj^  100 ms (70360 msJ.
 For some tasks (pressing a key in response lo a light) the system must behave as a serial processor For other tasks (typing, reading.
 and simultaneous translaiiun) integrated, parallel operation of the three subsystems is possible, in the manner of three pipelined processors: mformatiun Hows continuously from input lo output, with a lag showing that all three processors are working simultaneously.
 Suppose a stimulus impinges upon the retina of the eye at time ( 0.
 At the end of one Herccptual Processor cycle, / = t^ , the image is assumed to be available in the Visual Image Store and the human able to see it Shortly thereafter, a recognised, symbolic, acousticdily (or visually) coded representation of at least part of the Visual Image Store contents is assumed lo be present in Working Memory.
 In truth, this description is an approximation since different information in the image becomes available at different times much as a photopr.
iph develops, and a person can react before the image is fiilly dc\clopcd or he can w.
iii for a better image.
 depending on whether speed or accuracy is the more imporlanL According lo the model, perceptual events occurring within a single cycle arc combined into a single percept if they are sufficiently similar.
 Once in Working Memory, information is processed by the Cognitive 1'roces.
sor's rccuumzeacl cycle, analogous lo the fctchcxccutc cvcle of standard coinpiiters.
 On each cycle, the contents of Working Memory iniliiilc rfSsocLitivclylinkcd actions in I onglerm MciTidiy ("rcci)gni7e' ) which in turn modify llie contents of Working Mcnmry ("act).
 seilniB the stage for the next cycle.
 I'lans.
 procedures, and other forms of organized behavior can exist, bui Uicsc .
lie built up luil of .
III organi/cd set of iccogni/c.
icl cycles.
 Conscgiicnt lo a decision lo act by the Cogniiuc Processor, the action Itself is conirollcd hv the Motor Processor.
 Ciinlrary lo casual appearances, moiement is nul conliiuious.
 hul consists of a series of discreic innroniuvcmtiiis, c.
ilIi icquiiiii; one Motor I'Kucssor cycle ol .
ibiiiii T,,= 11)1) Ills I ho licdb,n.
l.
 loop Iron) .
utinn to perception is •̂iillu iriiily liMl|' I till I.
soil ins) ili.
il i.
ipid hcll.
ivioi.
il .
v.
ls soch is I I' '.
r ! ' I I.
 '.
.
H I I II •! Ml I II ' *>' I t I I ' •:niiu 1 M'.
liil I'lii.
v ii i 1.
 CALCULATING HUMAN PERFORMANCE We now illustrate how the portion of the Model Human Processor we have described can be used to calculate answers to problems of human performance lo address uncenainlies in the p.
irameters of the model, we define three model versions: one in which all the parnmeters listed are set to give the worst performance iShwmiin).
 one in which they are set t<i give the best performance U'asiman).
 and one set for a typical performance [Middleman).
 Scnsilivity analyses to sec if the results of interest arc affected by the true values of the parameters can be performed by making calculations for both Slowman and Fasunan.
 Example 1.
 Morse Code listening rate.
 What is the maximum rate, in words/min.
 at which Morse Code may be perceived? (Assume the old sort of American telegraph where dots and dashes are made by the clicks of the armature of an electromagnet, dots being distinguished from dashes by a shorter interval r,etween armature clicks.
) Solution.
 If a dash takes less than one Perceptual Processor cycle 7^=100 ms, there would be no way to tell it from a dot since.
 according to the model, durations smaller than ^ p cannot be perceived.
 Similarly, if two dots occur closer than about 100 ms they would be perceived as the same dot.
 So a reasonable approximation of the fa,stest rate is 100 ms/dol, 200 ms/dash.
 and 100 ms between Icttere.
 If the probabilities for the various letters in F.
nglish are multiplied by llie calculated lime per letter according to the above nilc, wc calculate a mean time of 459 ms/letter.
 Assuming 4,8 char/word (the value for llryan and llarter's, 1898, telegraphic speed lest), Max reception rate = (.
459 s/letler X 4.
8 leiter/word) + .
200 s/wordspace = 2.
4 s/word = 25 words/min.
 I This number is in the range quoted by Hryan and Hartcr (1898) for \cry good, experienced, railroad telegraphers, 2025 words/min.
 An upper bound on the maximum rale is given by a Fastman calculation: or course this calculation docs not guarantee thai 50 words/min is actually possible, only thai it would be surprising If anyone were to be faster.
 In fact, the fastest performance known to Uryan and Harter was close to this rate, 49 words/min.
 Example 2.
 Reaching to a button Suppose a user needs to move his hand D cm to reach a buium .
S cm wide on a calculator (He cannot reach it by louch).
 How long will the movement require? llie movement of the hand, as wc have said, is not continuous.
 Inn consists ol a scries ol micro corrections each with a certain ,H.
i.
iii.
ic\.
 lo ni.
ikc .
1 correction i.
ikcs at minimum one c>clc of the I'.
ii ,|iMi il I'nn'.
 • I M .
.
h .
nc ilic h ind iinc lulc of ilu( (H'liilivc l'nii.
i.
.
ii to dv>ulk on Ilk liimclIiiiii .
iiid mi', cycle of tlic Motor Processor to perform the correction, or t;,+ Tj+Tj,^ .
 The time to move the hand to the target is then the time lo pcrfonn n of these corrections or n(tp+r^^+rf^).
 Since t ^ + t ^ + t ^ ~ 300 ms, n is the number of roughly 300 ms intervals it takes to point to the target.
 Let X^ be the distance remaining to the target after the rth corrective move and X^ (= D) he the starting poinL Assume thai the relative accuracy of movement is conslanL that is, that A'j/A'^_] = a.
 where a (< 1) is the constant error.
 O n the first cycle the hand moves to r, = aX^ = oO.
 On the second cycle, the hand moves to Xj = aX, = a(aD) = a^D.
 On the nth cycle it moves to X, = a'D.
 The hand slops moving when it is w:thin the target area, that is when Solving for n gives n = log2(2Z)/5) / logj a.
 Hence the toul movement time T is given by n(T^+T^+Tj^^) Tpc, = 'w log,(2Z)/5) L « , = (1) where /̂  = (t/.
+ Tj~+tjj^) / log.
 Fx)uation 1 is called Fitls's l.
aw (this derivation based on Keele, 1968).
 It says that the time to move the hand lo a target depends only on the relative precision required, that is, the ratio between the target's distance and its size, llie constant a has been found to be about .
07 (Vincc, 1948), so l̂ f can be evaluated: I^, = 300 ms/log2(,07) bits = 78 ms/biL Results from various experiments give values in the in the l/^ 70120 ms/bit range.
 Example 3, Reaction time.
 The user is presented with two symbols, one at a time.
 If the second symbol is identical to the first, he is to push the key labeled ̂  cs otherwise he is to push No, What is the lime bciween signal and response for the Yes case? Soluiiiin llie first symbol is presented on the screen where it is observed by the user ,ukI pioicsscil bv his Pcrccpuial Processor civiiif rise In ;issoci.
iIC(l icprcsoni.
ilii'ns ii the iiscTs Visn;il lin.
î c Siore ;inil UihIiiil' Mcmuiia I lie m'cihu sMiihiil is iimv H.
ishcd ml the SLKcii :iiid is siniil.
iily processed.
 Sim e wc .
ire intciested In how Max rale = (100 ms/50 ms) X 25 words/min = 50 words/min.
 241 long it takes to respond to the second symbol, we now start the clock at 0.
 The Perceptual Processor processes the second symbol to get an iconic representation in Visual Image Store and then a visual representation in Working Memory, requiring one cycle, ip.
 If not too much time has passed since the first symbol was presented, Its visual code is still in Working Memory and the Cognitive Processor can match the visual codes of the first and second symbols against each other to see if they are the same.
 1 his match requires one Cognitive Processor cycle, j^.
.
 If they match, the Cognitive Processor decides to push the Yes button, requiring another cycle Tf.
 for the decision.
 Finally, the Motor Proces,sor processes the request to push the Yes button, requiring one Motor Processor cycle T ^ .
 The total elapsed reaction time, according to the Model H u m a n Processor, is Reaction time = t^ + 2t(~ + Tj^ = 100 (50200) + 2X(100 |25170|) + 100 [703601 m s = 400 [1709001 m s .
 This analysis could be repeated for the case ("name match") where the user is to press Yes if the symbols were both the same letter, although one might be in upper case, the other in lower case.
 Here, an extra Cognitive Processor cycle is required to get the abstract code for the symbol (Computed reaction time = 500 [19510701 ms).
 Likewise, if the user were to press Yes when the symbols were only of the same class ("class match"), say both letters, yet another Cognitive Processor cycle would be required (Computed reaction time = 600 [22012401 ms).
 Experiments have been performed to collect empirical data on the questions presented in these examples, llie finding is that name matches are about 70 m s slower than physical matches and that class matches arc about 70 ms slower yet.
 a number in line with our 100 m s (25170 msl value for t^ .
 The forgoing examples start from task analysis of a problem and proceed through approximation and calculation to make predictions of human performance of the sort that might be used in an engineering analysis of cognitive behavior.
 Although it is hoped that the Model H u m a n Processor itself will be useful for engineering, the real point is in the spirit of the enterprise: tliat knowledge in cognitive psychology and collateral sciences is sufficiently advanced to allow the analysis and improvement of common mental tasks.
 In short, that a cognitive engineering is now feasible, provided there is a disciplined understanding of how the knowledge must be structured to be useful.
 O f course, suggestions for improvement to the present model will occur all around.
 Uut tlien that is part of the idea and the challenge: to use the Model H u m an Processor as a framework into which new research results and insights can be fit in a way amenable to use in the cognitive engineering of practical mental tasks.
 REFERENCES Br>an, W L and Hancr, N (1)198) Siudic*; in Ihc physiology and psychology of Ihc iclcpraphic language.
 I'sichohgical Rfvirn 4.
 2753 Card.
 S K: Moran.
 T P: and Nc*c!l.
 A (in preparation) The Psyxhohiy of tlumonCompuirr InfFrocnon Hillsdale, N J : Irlb.
ium Associates Keclc.
 S (]%«) Moicmcnl control in skilled motor pcrfomiancc I'sythohtical Bullclm.
 3(17403 latour.
 R and Woolgar S (1979) 1 nhomwry l.
ifr ihf Social Conuruclion of Srnrjrific tarn I/indon S;ii'C I'uhlicalions Siiaioril II: Ikll (J and Si»cll \ (I9HII (i.
mpulcr Sirucnirn New York: VtrC.
Mu IliM \iiKL M ^ (I'MS) ( cittictive nifiulii'tits in a purMiil i ik Otratitk Jotirnaf nf ly/Hiimitltill /'vu/jc/(<j;i.
 /.
 HSM)J 242 file:///iiKLKnowledge Structures of Computer Programners Beth Adelson Harvard University Three resedrcn ijestlons are lidresseii nere: '^hai are me <no«ledif structures ot novice and expeit orojr^'^'^ers; ^nai principles underlie these structures; and how is the <no*le'))e used.
' The results ot the two experiments nescrioed nere indicate that novices form syntactically oasei) represerlt^tions ot projrams .
uhlcti are concerned with the details ot ho* the program tunctions While experts form ,nore ahstract conceptually Dase) representjl Ions Ahich are concerned dith that tne pioiraT, does.
 The results of these expeiiinents suggest mat the representation usel in d LasK constrains per f ormance and that ne* representations develop with exper t i se .
 tJiaeLiiieaL i.
 In this txperiment novice and Kxpert computer ptograiiniers pertorm a multitrial tree recall tasK CUeH).
 The stimulus set consists ot lines ot projraTimina code wriicn can be organized either syntactically or conceptually, rne clusters found in the recall protocols ot each group will sugyest the nature ot ttie kno»ledge structures of each group.
 iuaiecti.
 Kive Novice anJ five Lxpert programmers torined the two jroups of subjects.
 Stimuil.
 The organization of trie stimulus set Is central to this experiment.
 rne stimuli cotislsted ot lb lines ot code in Polymorphic Frogrammin j Lanjuage (•'PPL"is a language similar to APL) which could be organized either syntactically or procedurally.
Under the Procedural cldsslficatlon the items (lines ot code) can be organized into three projraiis: the first Is a sortlnj routine, tne second and the third are random sampling routines.
 The second basis for the classification of the stimulus set Is syntactic, »im syntax being used here the way It Is used to describe natural language.
 Different control phrases ot the computer language act as different parts of speech in that they expect certain other icinds of control phrases to precede or follow them.
lnere are five ilttetent syntactic categories present in the stimulus set.
 ELacedute.
 Kacri subject sa* all ot the items, one at a time ^nd then had to recall as many ot tiie items as possible.
 fhis procedure WHS repeated nine times.
The stimulus set uas presented in a dittercnt random order on each trial.
 I'he presentation ot items was not blocKed eltrier by program or by syntactic category.
 Neither group icne* wtiat the organization of the stimulus set was although both groups were familiar with the syntax of the Ian luage as well as the concepts behind ttie three programs.
 Ue^ults aod ulscussiao.
 The Novices recalled sijnitleant ly more than the Experts, ttiey also had larger chunKs and more consistent subjective organization.
 In order to look at tlie orjanization underlying these guantitative results multidimensional scalinjs and hierarchical clusterings were done on the recall protocols of each gioup.
 In figure 1 we see ttie twodimensional scaling solution Inser t h igure 1 Here.
 ot tnleriLem sm.
ilarity tor the Movlce jroup.
 fnt points in the solution are the 243 Items, they aie labelled by syntactic category.
 ihe procedural class!tIcalion of each Item is jlven In parentheses.
 For the Novices the Items cluster by syntactic category; the Assiijament statenents, (the A's), cluster in the tirst quadrant with the Conditional If statements (the I's) around them.
 rtie iteration or KOR statements (the F's) cluster in the second quadrant, the function Headers (the H's) cluster in the third quadtant and the KLTURfJ statements (the R's) cluster in the fourth quadrant.
 Ihbert Figure 2 Here.
 The t *odimens ional scaiin^j solution for the Fxpert aroup is presented in Figure two.
 Here we see the same set of items, but this time they cluster by program.
 in the labelling of the items the first number for an item represents the program that it belongs to, the second numoer tor an item represents its positon in the program.
 lor example item 2.
0 is trie first item in program two.
 The items from program one, those labelled 1,0 through 1.
4, are in trie first (luadrant.
 The items from program i.
, those labelled <;.
 0 through 2.
4, are in the third quadrant and the items from program three, those labelled 3.
0 through 3.
5, are in the fourth quadrant.
 The syntactic classification is given here in parentheses, it does not capture the clusters of the Experts the way it did the clusters of the Novices.
 The original recall protocols also showed that edcU of the Lxpert subjects recalled all of the lines from all three programs in the order in which they would have been evaluated in a running program,this suggests that the bxperts are using their knowledge of the serial nature of computer programs to organize the items within a cluster, it appears that the clusters of the Expert subjects are more abstract and conceptual than the syntactic clusters of the Novice subjects.
 Here as in other skilled problem solving domains we find that the chunks of the experts are based on the functional principles of the skill; items are categorized as members ot one procedure or another and are then organized serially within those procedural categories.
 The chunks ot the iJovices however, ate not functionally based, they aie syntactic in nature.
 In addition, the recall protocols of the Novices sriowed no internal organization of the items otrier than the grouping by syntactic category, that is within the Novice categories triere was no regularity as there was in the Expert catejories.
 l:.
xa£I.
lu&QL 11 The results of the first experiment suggested that the organization of tne Novices was syntactic wnile the organization ot tlie Experts was functional.
 It is possible then, that when given wliole programs to comprehend experts form an abstract representation that is concerned not with the specific mechanics of a given algorithm but only with nihal it is that the program does.
 U Is also possible that a representation formed by a novice, because it is syriactical ly based would oe more concerned with iiou the specific program functioned.
 The second experiment presented here was designed to check out the possibility that during program comprehension novices form representations ot how programs function, while experts form representations ot what programs do.
 The strategy used to look at this possibility • • "•• .
.
.
I.
 .
„,,» :.
„H .
,r„ 244 both types ot represeiitdt i oris and ttien to look at the resiJltinj perlorTsnce In e^ch situation.
 :iutiiecti.
 ine subjects »ere a jroup ot Novice an'J a group o£ Lxperl programmers.
 iLiauii.
 m e stinuli consisted of eiqnt hpl projri'^s •ith t*o types of tie* charts and two types ot questions for eact\ of the eigiit projra'ns.
 Ihe tlo* charts consisted of Lo« retail fio* charts Aihlcti descrioed what the proiraji Jid and High Detail tlo« charts *hich described no* the program functioned.
 ine (jaestions consisted ot Lox Detail questions *hlch asKed a question about *hat the program 'Jid and llijh Detail questions *tiicn asKed a question about ho s the proqtdii functioned.
 titacedujie.
 in order to encouraqe subjects to form a representation at one level of abstraction ot another subjects were first shown a tlo* ctjart of a progran at a given level of abstraction.
 Iney were then shown the actual program along with a question about the program.
 After seeing ttie program itself, along with the question the subjects answered tne question .
 Level ot detail ot the flow chart *as combined with level ot detail of the questioi^ to form tour conditions for each group ot subjects; t«o "congruent" conditions and two "noncongruent" conditions.
 In the two congruent conditions subjects saw eittier a Lo* Detail flow chart and then a Lo* Detail question or a High Detail tlo« chart and then a High Detail guestlon.
 In tne t/io "noncongruent" conditions subjects saw either a Low Detail flow Chart and then a High Detail guestlon or a High Detail flow chart and then a Low DetaiI quest ion.
 Iwo times Aere recorded: Comprenens i on tine, that is ttie time it too< tne subject to say that s/he understood the flow chart well enou )h to qo on and stuiy the program and the question togetfjer and question tine, that is trie time interval between seeing the program with the question and oeinq able to *rlte down the aiiswer.
 A "Code unly" control conditon was included in *nicri subjects sa* trie prorram itself immediately and ttien sa* the same program again *itri ttie question.
 iie^uXL^ aad Uiscus&lou 1.
 Comprehension Time (interval oetween seeiiiq the flow chart and understanaing it) Comparing the results ot the Low Detail, High Detail and Code Unly conditions, subjects understood the Low Detail flow charts more quickly than the HIjh Detail flow charts and the High Detail flow charts more quickly than the code alone.
 Ihe tlo* charts do seem to aid comprehension and it appears that they do so by orqaniiin 1 the information for the subjects rather ttian by just reducing the information since tne High Detail flow charts, which had more units on the average than the code were understood more <iuickly than the code alone in the Code unly control condition (Units are boxes in the flow chart or single lines in the code.
) II.
 yuestion lime (interval between seeini trie question and bein ) able to answer It) A.
 Nonconqruent Conditons (here the level of detail ot ttie flow chart and the guestlon do not matcti) Ihe results of tlie noncongruent conditions give us information about each group's most natural level ot abstraction.
 the 245 rationale behind this Is that the flow charts prepare the subjects to represent the code at one level ot abstraction or another.
 It the level then turns out to be inappropriate tor answering the questioti subjects *ill be substantially slowed down it the appropriate level is also not the level which they usually use.
 Un the other hand it tlie appropriate level is the level *hich they usually use they should still be able to quickly torm •=> representation at that level.
 Insert Ki lure i Here.
 Looking at the lett hand side ot Fiqure J *e see that trie Novices are actually faster than the Experts when answering a High Detail question although «e see on the right hand side that the txperts are faster than the Novices When answering a Low Detail question.
 That the Novices are faster than the f:xperts when having to answer a High Detail question indicates that the Novices are used to forming High Detail, that is nonabstract, specific representations ot how programs function.
 That trie txperts are tester than the Novices wrien having to answer a Lo* Detail question indicates that the txperts are used to forming Low Detail, that is abstract representations of what a program is doing.
 The error rates tor the noncongruent and Code Unly conditions both show the same interaction.
 Novices do well on High Detail questions while txperts do well on Low Detail questions.
 program functions while txperts represent what a program does.
 Although it seems difficult for both groups to switch from their preferred levels of representation when they have been encouraged to use them, It is still possible that both groups can form effective representations at their nonpreferred levels if they are given the proper aid.
 Ttiis is what was done in the congruent condltons.
 The results ot these condltons showed that both Novices and txperts answered botfi High and Low Detail questions equally quickly suggesting that they can be somewhat flexible in their encoding.
 CoocXu&lao& The results ot the two experiments reported here suggest that Novice and Kxpert computer programmers represent information about programs differently.
 The representations of the txperts is more abstract and is based on what the program does, while the representation of the Novices is more detailed ana is based on how the program functions.
 Ihese differences also influence tlie utilizalion ot ^ne information being represented.
 b.
 Congruent Condltons (here the level ot detail of the flow chart and the question match ) The results of the Noncongruent Conditions suggest that Novices (to represent how a 246 U c d C 5 .
75 0 .
75 :> i r.
 '2.
1(A) ^2.
0 (H) '2.
4(1) o2.
3(A) •2.
2(1) •1.
0(H) •I.
KF) •1.
2(F) •1.
3(1) •1.
4(R) 3.
0 (H)°  3.
1(F) •3.
2*(F) •3.
3(A) 3.
5(R) •^•'^(" N tW .
5 0 DIMENSION 1 VARIACL.
t RlTURNED OLC O LU •H(3.
0) 0 DIMtivJSION 1 •\{2 •1(3.
4) • A(33) •A(2.
3) A(^.
l) • •R(3.
b) ) •R(I.
4) •1(2.
4) 1.
5 247 Olll.
.
 I !n .
 T I IK (i.
Mir M I r.
 A • ri.
i.
.
 r.
iii.
i .
11 cii ;';i.
.
ii •, 1) 2! no* " ! ! 1:40 1:30 1 :&0 0: in u= .
 (I.
 = 1,1 ;h ) hilt, 1 4 I I.
 i)t t 1.
11,.
 C .
.
 'ii' I i!KAl;S ' l,n V C'UI.
 I rri.
' 1 (" I( Xi'KlT en ivi'iu .
I U'•• 'Ui;i' 1 : 1 1 \:// I : 0 J I : 1.
1 f.
ur cii;h;puk.
 i l.
li« hH,i; l:iii ,:'j', 1:3} 1:ul 248 GLISP: AN EFFICIENT, ENGLISHLIKE PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE Gordon S.
 Novak Jr.
 Computer Sciences Department University of Texas at Austin Austin, Texas 78712 1.
0 INTRODUCTION My earlier research on computer understanding of physics problems stated in English [1,2] has convinced me that English is best viewed as a programming language.
 That is, an English sentence does not contain the message to be transmitted to the reader, but rather is a program which provides the minimum Information necessary for the reader to construct the message from what the reader already knows.
 In the case of physics problems, the size of the model constructed by the ISAAC program is some 30 times as large as the size of the English sentences which specified the construction of that model.
 Woods [3] has suggested that the need to communicate complex concepts over a bandwidthlimited serial channel (speech) was the driving force behind the evolution of natural lariguage abilities in humans.
 Study of the ways In which English permits compact expression of complex Ideas reveals several features which would be useful if incorporated into programming languages.
 The reader of an English text maintains a current context, or focus [4], which can be used to understand definite references to objects or features of objects which are not specified completely, but are closely related to objects in the current context.
 For example, consider the following sample of text: Last night I went to Scholz's for a beer.
 The bartender asked for a ride home, since his car was disabled.
 Somebody had let the air out of the tires.
 A person reading this passage can easily understand a definite reference such as "the air", which means "the air which was contained in the tires which are part of the car which Is owned by the person who works as a bartender at the bar named Scholz's".
 The reader has made these connections while reading the story by using world knowledge and by maintaining a current context relative to which definite references to previously unmentioned objects and features can be understood, each reference to an object or feature causes It to be brought into the context, thus enabling further references relative to it.
 The ability of the reader to infer the connection between a definite reference in a sentence and a "closely related" object in the current context permits the compact specification of complex relationships among objects.
 Another valuable feature of English is that it provides a standard Interface for communicating information.
 The writer and the reader may have very different internal representations for certain objects, but they both have procedures for translation between their internal representations and corresponding English descriptions.
 A related feature is provided by "objectoriented" programming in the SMALLTALK language [5], which is based on the idea of Objects which communicate by exchanging Messages.
 In most programming languages, object representations are merely storaije locations; the nature of the representation is represented implicitly in the programs which manipulate the storage locations.
 In SMALLTALK, the internal structure of objects is hidden, and programs cannot manipulate the internal structures directly; Instead, programs query and change values in the objects by sending them messages, e.
g.
, "what is your X?" or "set your X to the value y".
 Only the object itself knows whether it actually has an X, or whether its X is a consequence of other values.
 In addition, the object can act to maintain its own internal consistency; for example, changing the size of an object may require that the object change the size of its picture on a display screen.
 Unfortunately, SMALLTALK has been implemented on special hardware, and has been unavailable to most researchers.
 2.
0 NEED FOR ENGLISHLIKE PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES Englishlike programming provides two features which are needed by workers in Cognitive Science and Artificial Intelligence and which are not provided by most existing programming languages: brevity of expression and ease of changing representations.
 In fact, these two are intertwined: the more detail one has provided about how to perform an action on an object, tha more code one will have to change if the basic structure of the object is to be changed.
 Most existing programming languages implicitly specify the structures of objects within the code.
 For e^cample, in either PASCAL or CLISP [6], referencing 249 a field of a record structure requires that both the record and a complete path from the record to the desired field be specified In the code; If the record structure Is to be changed, all the code which references such records will often have to be changed also.
 In a large system, such changes are so difficult that significant changes to data structures are seldom possible once a large body of code exists.
 3.
0 GLISP GLISP Is a LISPbased language which permits Englishlike programs containing definite references.
 GLISP Is implemented by a compiler which compiles GLISP programs into LISP relative to a knowledge base which is separate from the programs; the resulting LISP code can be further compiled to machine language by the LISP compiler.
 In GLISP, the execution of a program causes an implicit context of computation to be constructed, just as an English conversation causes an implicit conversational context to be constructed in the minds of the conversants.
 The context is computed at compile time, using flow analysis, from the previous context, which includes Structure Descriptions of previously mentioned objects.
 Definite references to features of objects which are currently in context are permitted; these cause the newly referenced objects to be added to the context, allowing further references relative to them.
 The initial context within a GLISP function consists of the arguments of the function, its PROG variables, and any declared global variables.
 The context contains, for each variable, its variable name, reference name, and Structure Description.
 When a definite reference is encountered within a GLISP program, the compiler determines whether the reference names such a variable or names a substructure or feature of some variable which is in context.
 If a substructure or feature is referenced, the compiler determines how to get it from the original structure; the resulting code replaces the definite reference in the compiled version of the program.
 In addition to producing code to get the feature from the starting structure, the compiler also determines the Structure Description of the result.
 The new item and its Structure Description are added to the context, thus enabling further definite references relative to it.
 When the compilation is finished, the context structures disappear; the compiled code contains only the LISP code necessary to perform the specified actions.
 Thus, the code produced by GLISP is relatively efficient; the user of GLISP must pay for compilation, but does not incur a runtime penalty.
 The GLISP compiler runs Incrementally, so that functions are compiled automatically the first time they are called.
 The following example Illustrates some of the features of GLISP.
 Suppose that a wicked witch curses a grandmother by decreeing that each of her calico cats shall age by five years.
 The code to accomplish this can be written In GLISP as follows: (CURSE (GLAMBDA ( (A GRANDMOTHER) ) (PROG () (FOR EACH CAT WITH COLOR = 'CALICO DO AGE <+ 5) ))) The GLAMBDA indicates that this is a GLISP function, and causes the GLISP compiler to be called when the function is first interpreted (using the LAMBDATRAN feature of INTERLISP [6]).
 Since GLISP maintains a context and permits definite reference, it is often unnecessary to give names to variables; thus, we need only declare the type of the argument, (A GRANDMOTHER).
 Since a GRANDMOTHER is in context, the compiler can determine how to access her CATs and how to generate an appropriate loop to examine each of them.
 Within the loop, of course, the current CAT is in context, allowing definite reference to its features.
 The compiler generates the appropriate kind of test to compare the COLOR of the CAT against the constant 'CALICO; if needed, the constant and the operator could be coerced into the appropriate forms.
 For example, 'CALICO might have several possible meanings; in the context of the COLOR of a CAT, it could be coerced to the unique constant 'CALICOCATCOLOR.
 If the test is satisfied, the AGE of the CAT is increased by 5; the operator ^ + , which specifies appending when applied to lists, is interpreted as addition when applied to numbers.
 In the GLISP program, we have implied that certain objects have certain features, e.
g.
, that a CAT has a COLOR, but we have said nothing about how to get or replace the COLOR of a CAT, or about what type of entity the COLOR actually Is.
 This information Is held separately in the knowledge base of Structure Descriptions and other information relative to which the program is compiled.
 This makes possible significant changes to data structures with no changes to the code — a goal long sought in highlevel languages, but one which has been largely unrealized for structures Involving pointers.
 GLISP can be viewed as similar to SMALLTALK in the sense that a program does not 250 specify directly how to manipulate objects.
 Instead of sending a message to an object, we can think of the GLISP compiler as generating the code to do what the object would do if It received such a message.
 This provides some of the flexibility of SMALLTALK with high runtime efficiency.
 The GLISP compiler allows GLISP expressions and ordinary LISP to be mixed; the user can use as much or as little GLISP as desired.
 A Structure Description language is LISP data structures, automatically generates structures.
 In addition, clean interface to one languages, the user can provided for the common and the compiler code to access such the compiler provides a or more representation use both ordinary LISP structures and units i.
n hLs favorite representation language, accessing both in a transparent manner.
 A more compact, CLISPllke syntax for GLISP expressions is provided in addition to the Englishlike syntax.
 The GLISP compiler, accessing both LISP structures and our GIRL represeatatiou Innguage [7], is currently running.
 Berkeley, 1977.
 Also Technical Note No.
 151, SRI International, Menlo Park, California.
 5.
 Ingalls, D.
 , "the Smalltalk76 Programming System: Design and Implementation", 5th ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, Tucson, Arizona, January 1978.
 6.
 Teitelman, W.
, "INTERLISP Reference Manual", Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, 1978.
 7.
 Novak, G.
, "GIRL and GLISP: An Efficient Representation Language", submitted to IJCAI8I.
 4.
0 ACKNOWLEDGMENT This research was supported by NSF Award No.
 Sfc;D7912803 in the Joint National Institute of Education  National Science Foundation Program of Research on Cognitive Processes and the Structure of Knowled^H in Science and Mathematics.
 5.
0 REFERENCES 1.
 Novak, G.
, "Coaputer Understanding of Physics Problems Stated in Natural Language", American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Microfiche 53, 1976.
 2.
 Novak, G.
 , "Representations of Knowiedg'? In a Program for Solving Physics Problems", Proc.
 5th IJCAI, Cambridge, Mass.
, 1977, pp.
 286291.
 3.
 Woods, W.
 A.
, Symposium on Formal Semantics and Natural Language Processing, University of Texas at Austin, liarch, 1979.
 4.
 Grosz, B.
, "The Reprnsi^ntation and Use of Focus in Dialogue Understand iiî ,", p't.
D.
 thesis.
 University of California, 251 SOME gii':sTioN,s Aiiom veuiiai.
 and imcioiuai.
 kri'kksf.
ntAllON Shrliltin K'llIiiiiimuI Itox lA'i3, Stnlidn 1! Dnwn.
.
vU'w, Ontario I'.
ir.
i 1 Ic Is hiLwi'Cn di'Linct rinii>n:.
 .
lie intrin>'i"R.
 They suRgoKt previously nnsiispoctcti unities.
 For inst.
imo, tlic parallels .
iinonn tlic laws of railintion, magnetism, and electricity.
 Of course, wo may impose .
1 parallel upon two regions suggesting an inireal unity.
 For ins tame, paralleling laws of historical development and liiiman social organization along tlie lines of biological evolution suggests an tmreal unity between culture^ and biology.
 Thus, parallels suggest unities, hut the unities should always be approached with a questioningattitude.
 Tt is with this altitude that 1 wish to approach the parallel hypotheses presented by E.
I), llirsch, Jr.
, and E.
ll.
 Gombricli about the history and psyciiology of verbal and pictorial representation, respectively.
 Tlie p.
lrallel aspect of these hypotheses r.
'iiSe iiii)>ortant <iuestlons aboiit cognitive processes connected with verbal and pictorial structures: Is there one cognitive process underlyinj; rcsuling worifs and seeing pictures? Do reailing and seeing pictures appear to the mind in the same way? If we syntlu>si7.
e tlic work of llirsch and Coinbrich, we arrive at yesanswers to both questions.
 This result is surprising.
 It counters the coirwimn assumptii>n that verbal and pictorial representation are very different niorles of co^;nition.
 The o L<l saying "a picture Is worth a 1,000 words" may be literally true.
 Pictures may be dense versions of written verbal representations.
 So, thinking pictorially and thinking verbally may be one mental process.
 This, then, is the purpose of my p.
'iper: to raise questions about a possible unity between picturing and verbalising suggestt'd by parallels in the work of Combrich and llirsch.
 1.
 llirsch on Composition: llirsch ar.
ks: are there universal rules for composition? His answer involvis ileveloping a theory oi the psychology of reading anil applying this theory to the bisti>ry of composition and the process of reading.
 The history of written language progresses toward increading readability.
 The more easily a passage can be read, the more readable it is.
 The le.
ss time one can see through a passage, as it were, the more easy it is to road.
 Thus, principles of style—developed by a process of tri.
i landerror throughout the history of writingtend towards 'economy', 'simplicity', 'variety within unity'.
.
.
 for tlie purpose of conveying the author's thought (including intentionally obscure and complex thought).
 In short: ".
.
.
relative readability is an intrinsic and truly universal norm of writing".
' This thesis of the universality of the goal of increading rcad.
ibility is intertwined wi tli the liypothesis o( "linguistic universals".
 The minri fuocesses all written texts in the same way.
 I'or instance, the mind looks for patterns tb.
it when not fiMin<l lead to uncertainty; and when too often found lead to inattention: To avoid v.
asielul attention shifts, the verbal theme of one phrase must be similar to the tluMne of the preceiling phrase.
 The expectancies set up by one phrase should be fulfille.
l in the next.
.
.
^ At this point, the reader may wonder how verbal patterns appear in the mind? Do they appiir as wordlike? Ilirscli has a provoking ansvjer.
 The shortterm memory holrls verbal patterns almost literally.
 Conse(|ueut ly, the shortterm memory which comes into immediate contact with the page, looks tor similarity in verbal patterns for case of retention.
 However, the longterm memory contains semantic contents and recalls the meanings through seeking thematic representations or labels that surround the meanings.
 Frimi this difference in the ways ;;hort and longterm memory process verbal patterns, two consequences occur for the reading of texts: l)Tlie shr)rtterm memory b{̂ st operates (ui c IausesdiscrcLe units of verbal patterns that rccurr in the ter.
t.
 Readability is enli.
inced when closure is rapid .
ind stable, simr rapid ami stable closure greatly reduces both processing time and the burden on shortterm memory.
3 2)The longterm memory is stimulated by labels or "thematic tags'' that refer to a variety of specific ways of verba I i/, i ng meanings.
 Since the meaning ol the whole discourse (remembered .
ind expected) is mainly stored In ,1 nontemporal, nonl ingui s t ic form, the writer will assist the reader by continually repi.
Uing n rather small number ol thematic tags which represent that remembereil (and expected) holistic meaning.
.
.
^ In short, the process of readinginvolves the application of nonlinguistically stored scmontic contents to verbal patterns ttiot rcc/tiirc fcprtition for stora/;e in t/ie slmrtLcrm rnvmniry.
 Uitliiiiit en»Migli rcpctiti(}n of vcrhnl pnLCcrns, the shortterm memory cannot grasp the text in order to transfer the sema?itic ciuitents to the huigtcnn meiii<»ry.
 However, with too much repetitii»n, the mind loses attention.
 Likewise, without the use of labels, semantic contents cannot be real led for application to specific verbal patterns; but with the use of too many labels too often, semantic contents become .
lulled.
 llirsch's theory of readability may be extrapolated to a theory ol bow thoughts appear in the mind: how does the miml's eye see thoughts? We think with nonlinguis t ic semantic contents.
 The mlntl's eye sees nothing, but the mind's 'hands' shape semantic contents.
 Words stimulate and simulate nonlinguistic thinking.
 For instance, readability depends upon striking a balance between the use of thematic tags and specific, riiurrent, verbal patterns: thematic tags set up a context oT expectations, and recurrent verbal patterns full{I ami modify those expectations.
 This way of s truclvir i ui; tixts simulates the process (if specifying and modifying general meanings: our thinking involves the formation of general themes tiiat are applied to specific s it uationsand so, thinking in 'theraala' involves setting up expectations that when unsatisfied li'ads to the refashioning of those 'tluMiiata'.
 Thus, the more reailable a text is the more recognizable is its illusion of thoughtprocesses: the formatiim and refashioning 'if semantic worlds or themata.
 In short, my extrapolation of llirsrh's theory of readability to cognitive processes is this: tliinking may be a nonlinguistic process of which verbal patterns provide an illusion: the greater the illusion, the more readable the texttlu' more transparent the meaning or thougiit.
 Though we don't think jj| words, we think with words: words, by simulating cognitive processes, provide a track for directing and improving our cognitive processes.
 1 will come back to this theory of the illusory nature of verbal representation after turning to Gombrich's parallel discussion of the representative nature of pictorial illu;ion.
 2.
 Combrich on Pictorial Representation: Most people assiime that looking at real objects is radically different from looking at pictures.
 Combrich has taught us that this natirral way of thinking about pictures is mistaken.
 The mental proccssc'S involvetl in looking at pictures and objects are the same: both involve epxectat ions, corroborations, and counterexpiHtations .
 This surprising the<iry of the cognitive proctsses involved in perception provokes the question; how do we ever tell the difference betweeen Pictures and objects? The answer is obvious: when you try to put your head through a painting of an open window, the canvass 252 or wall gets in the way: .
.
.
we still experience snme kind of illusion when we see a picture on a wall or in a book from a point, that is, where tlie perspective should go wrong.
 Here as always we first read the picture for ci'tisistency, and this consistency, the interaction nl clues, is not wholly upset by our changing viewpoint.
 The painting may cease to be consistent with the world jround it, but it rcamins clo^tly knit within its own system of references.
^ I want to explain Combrich's theory in some <lctailin order to bring out its parallels with llirsch's clieory.
 In seeing pictures, according to Gombricli, nur minds matcli the conventionalized modes of representing reality against the picture; and match the picture against reality.
 Our minds test the degree of recogni;^3bil ity of the picture.
 Moreover, the history nf pictorial representatii>n in art is a liisLory of making .
lud mntching.
 The cognitive process of making and mnlihing h.
is an overflow into the nature i»f veritlical perception; we finti th.
'it veridical perception also involves making .
unl iiiatchiiig.
 Just as in painting pictures, artists use conventional schemata as hyp<itheses about how we see reality, so too in attempting to sec objects and events in the rciil world, <)ur mind employs hypothetical schemata that are oitlier corroborated or refuted by reality: It is the power of expectation rather than the power of conceptual knowledge that mol<ls what we sec in life no less than in art.
.
.
Every time we scan the iHtance we somehow compare our expectation, our projection, with the incomhig message.
 .
.
.
Here as always il remains our task to keep our guesses flexible, to revise them if reality appears to contradict, ami to try again for a hypoihesis that mig.
ht fit the data.
<> Uy now the thesis of the inferential nature of perception is wellknown.
 However, thi', thesis raises an important hut unaksed tuiestion about the nature of mental representations: how does the mind's eye see the correction of false visual hypotheses? Does the mind see piiLures that are redrawn? For theoretical reasons the answer is no: the mind's eye sees nothing; railur, the mind's hands reshape nonvisuali/.
cd hypotheses about tlie world.
 Given Combrich's theory that pictorial representation has a history because the mind makes and matches visu.
i! scheriiaLa against reality, it follows that the vir.
ual schemata teach us how to see: .
.
.
The wish to find ccuif irmat ion of some new experiment may make the pr<»gressive suggestible and may thus facilitate the artist's task of iiiodifyiog his code.
.
.
we genuinely recognize pictorial effects in the world around us, rather than the familiar siglits of the w<irld in pictures.
' The fact that pictures sometimes teach us how to see, falsifies the commonly lield thesis that in painting we copy our internal threedimensional mental pictures onto a twod iiiien.
ional plane.
 No riTognition of reality could h( possible if we were only copying our mental linages when we paintwt' coulil only see reflections of our minds rather than reflecti.
ins of reality (and reflections of art in reality).
 Since painted images of reality both thneive and inform the eye^, vje learn how to sec reality by i;ay of tc'ting our pictorial representations and Uiuivisiia I ized Internal (mental) schemata infonning our visual expectation, against reality.
 When 'introspecting' upon the process of correcting n«'ntal schemata, though we 'sec' nothing, we feel the impa( t.
 of our mind's hands reshaping those nonvisualized sclu'niaca that reset our expectations about visual reality.
 At this point, ou< may wonder: do we ever have mental images? Taking off from Ci>mhrich's theory o( making pictorial •.
( Iiem.
ita and matching them against reality lor recogni, dii I i ty, I hypothesize thai we learn to have mental images by introjecting visuali zeil pictorial schemata.
 The mind's eye is a constrint dcriveil from seeing representational pictures.
 ConscquenL 1 y, there is no natural way of seeing reality: no fixed r<|iertoire of mental images that we attempt to impose upon reality.
 Rather, we learn t>> sec reality in specific ways through the construction and testing of visiializeel hypotheses or pictures.
 Wc learn to have different forms of mental images by intrtt jec t ing different s< hema ta .
 In short, if wc could construct a catnera for taking pictures of mental images, we would only see copies of introjected pictures.
 When the mind is actively srcingprt>bing realityit t^mploys nonvisualized projecti(Uis of reality: the mind 'feels' reality with 'mental shapes' that arc refashioned by the way of the process of making and matching.
 3.
 Parallels between Reading and SecingPictures: For the sake of brevity, 1 tabulate the parallels between llirsch and Cimibrich: juestions/Answers How docs the history of progriss? I!y making an<l matdiing schemata Cor lirsch :ompos ition readabiIity, How clo wc reael see liy testing anticipations against L .
.
 .
 texts? text.
 Rxtrapolations How do the mental contents of I appear in the mind? rvcrbal/ They appear as_ (schemata).
 contents (uinlinguisiic Gombricli pictures recognizabllity.
 pictures ? picture.
 pictorial/ schemata non'isua1ized Ihno does the mind correct its internrtl schemata? liy matching its schemata against introjected .
 uerba1/ | pictorial/ representations.
 These parallel questifuis and theses prompt the idea of a single process informing the two distinct areas.
 It.
 Is there a common psyrluilogj ca 1 process for reading and seclngpictures?: I'liis question, suggested by the parallils between llii'scli and Gonibrich, involves searching for a single ininta I process for the representation of reality through words and through pictures.
 Thougji both forms of represeiuat loiiwords and ]iirtureshave liifferent manners ol re(eiring Lo reilily, we wonder whether they are grasped and used by the mind in one way with one mental oper.
ition.
 Tor instance, according to Nelson ilooiiman'', though pictures am! words are nonnotaliona1 (i.
e.
 unlike musical scores where each note on a scale stands for a specific sinind) , hut weirds not pictures are syntactically and semantically eli f f erent iated .
 In plain words, words are distinct and refer L" di.
tinct re|',ions of reality; but pictures contain foiaiis tliai merge and refer to overlapping areas of reality.
 However, the question we ask here .
ecks t ri uncover a common mental process for grasping the very different symbi>lic systems of words ami pictines.
 How could this common niiiital process work, if it were to exist? 253 Tlie ciignitivo tnntoiiLs ol miml .
iic iioniijinbn 1 ic and mmrcprpsontnt ivo.
 Our minds .
sli,i|>r i(r.
 cunlciiCn by simulcantiMisly inl roji'c t inj; iind iii id ji c Liiii', verbal or pictminl p.
iLtrrns.
 Our minds |)riij<'c I slinpcs upon reality lliat .
ire ptrceplna 1 ly refined by the use of Intro jeeLed pictori.
il s< liemala .
nul counterexpected verbally coded perception';.
 Ilu flexible mental fiehls of our niinils take on ini reaainR representative content tbroupli nsinp, mismatches of introjcctcd verbal/pictorial sclicin.
il.
i, and misinatclics of reality, to reshape tile iiienL.
il fii'lds.
 In Slim: syntbes iuinj; the theories ol llirscb and Gombrich permits us to seek for an unifie<l mental process for thinkinp, and siciu);.
 The process may be this: We probe reality with simulations of thinkingwordsand simulations uT rcaIityscenpicLures.
 Thes.
e probes nccur in the titind as prujecti'd nonsyiiilit)! io fields and appear L<> Lbe miiul's eye as inCrojected verbal pattirns and pictorial schemes.
 1t is easy to confuse Lbe inLrojected contents of our mind vjitli the actual meni.
il processes of tbinkinR/secinj;: Che process nf holding and shaping contents with oyn miiul's 'hands'.
 NOTES 1.
 p.
89,E.
I), llirscb,,Ir.
 , The riiilosophy i>f Composition (Chicago, University of Chieago Press, 1977) 2.
 p.
 107, ibid.
 3.
 p.
 119, ibid.
 4.
 pp.
 12312^, ibid.
 5.
 p.
227, K .
II.
CcMiibricli, Art and lllusion(New .
lersey, PrinceLi'n f'niversily press, 1901).
 6.
 p.
22.
'5, ibid.
 7.
 p.
 237, i;ombricli,"Vi sua I Discovery Jirouidi Art", ed.
 James Hogg, I'sychology and the Vis\ial Arts (llarmondsworlh.
 Penguin, 19(i9) 2 1 5238 .
 8.
 See p.
314, Combrich, u p.
c i t.
 9.
 r'elson Goodman, Languages of Art (Indianapolis, RohbsNerrill, I9fi8) ; Sheldon Ri chiiumd ,"A Discussion of Some Theories oC Pictorial Representation", Dialectica.
34 ,3(1 980) 22<»24(l.
 254 The relationship between human motion and objects in the cognitive representation of visual events.
 Margot D.
 Lasher Assumption College This paper concerns the cognitive representation of events which involve human motion.
* I have elsewhere proposed a schematic structure for events which involve only the motion of the body, as in some athletics and dance (Lasher, 1981).
 In this paper I would like to describe the relationship between the motion of the body and objects which may be part of the event.
 The eventual goal is to develop schematic representations for all types of events of human motion.
 The paper will look at two pairs of event units.
 The first event of each pair involves only the motion of the body; the second involves that same category of motion in relation to an object.
 Certain aspects of these paired events can be identified without further analysis.
 We are dealing with only one type of event unit, an event involving voluntary human motion.
 The AGENT of the event will always be the person in motion.
 The ACTION will consist of a description of that person's motions.
 Event 1: A person leans, reaches out, and brings the arm back toward the body.
 Event 2: A person leans, reaches out, picks up a glass and brings the glass back toward the body.
 Figure 1 provides schematic structures for Events 1 and 2.
 Event 1 describes a motion unrelated to any object.
 It might be a movement in athletics or dance.
 The ACTION consists of a preparatory motion and a completing motion.
 There is experimental evidence for the psychological coherence of this preparatorycompleting structure in the perception of events involving human motion (Lasher, 1981).
 A psychologically coherent event unit consists of a small, unfixed number of preparatory motions followed by a completing motion.
 Preparatory motions tend to be relatively stable motions, while completing motions are relatively unstable motions.
 The unstable completing motion is encoded as the intention of the entire event unit.
 The event unit is encoded as completed when this relatively unstable motion is finished and the person has returned to a position of stability in relation to the ground.
 Each motion, whether preparatory or completing, can be described in terms of both the changes in the human body itself, labeled MOTION in Figure 1, and in terms of the variables which influence that motion, labeled MOTION RELATIONS.
 There are a potentially infinite number of motion relations.
 The actual representation of any event in a real mind will depend upon what variables are attended to at the time.
 I have assumed, for purposes of illustration, that ws are attending to the direction of the lean and reach, which is forward, and to nothing else.
 Event 2 adds a visible object to the scene, a glass.
 We want the representations to accurately reflect that the bodily motions are almost identical in Events 1 and 2, yet there is a crucidl difference: a glass is picked up in Event 2.
 The difference is expressed in the representation of the COMPLETING MOTION, which is cognitively interpreted as the intention of the event unit.
 The completing motion is a motion which contains as one of its internal positions that of the fingers closing in upon and pressing against the glass.
 I have arbitrarily used the words reachespicks up to represent this motion.
 The fact that in language these are two separate verbs is irrelevant to the representation of the visual event unit.
 The MOTION RELATION which most influences the form of this completing motion is the OBJECT, the glass.
 The verbal nature of the representation is again not relevant.
 Holding might seem to be a separate motion because it is a verb rather than a preposition.
 From the viewpoint of the visual event, it is equivalent to a preposition: it is a link between the bodily motion and some other spatially represented variable which influences the form of the body's motion.
 The holding is not a separate motion.
 The body returns to a stable, balanced position, with the arm near the central axis of the torso, at the ends of both paired events.
 In Event 2, however, the body returns with a glass.
 Events 1 and 2 were originally paired because they both belong to a general category of human motion events, reaching motions.
 Laban has spoken of such abstract categories of motion (Laban, 1966).
 We reach to pick something up, to hang something up, to put something down.
 The motion in bowling and the pitch in baseball are full reaching motions.
 When the reaching motion is extended to its fullest without the presence of an object, and one leg is extended 255 Figure 1 a.
 Event 1 ACTION pejson r? i^PAP ATOH Y c o m i .
^TINC KC^IOr RiiATIOlo MOTION PEIATIOrS lean LifK fEJSGT ^^^^^^' LINK OEj:^GT intc into forvfard space tov/arr forward sT>ace rCvent AC^:'" pers on TP~'VAPi'T̂ n''Y npy.
'pT i:?'T'7?"'̂  KCTIO" lan IITK ^i^^GT "^^^^^ II?.
K CPJ'JCT 1 I "' I ii;:acp hold ,'.
"''3,85 256 backwards in order to balance the reaching arm, we have an arabesque in ballet.
 An interesting thing about human motion events is that any event involving voluntary human motion can be described in terms of AGENT • ACTION, without an OBJECT: any ACTION which can be performed in relation to an OBJECT can also be performed without the ObJECT.
 But in terms of a description of the visual structure, there is always a spatial direction involved.
 The person reaches upward or downward, toward the sky or toward the ground.
 In training for athletics or dance, aspects of the environment that are taken for granted in ordinary motion are often brought to conscious attention: the athlete is trained to notice the relationship between the body and the ground, and the body and the space around it.
 If the spatial aspects of the event are considered in relation to the motion itself, these spatial aspects act in the same ways as an object would act: as variables relevant to the intention of the motion.
 Because of this similarity between visual directions and ordinary objects in a scene, I have represented them equivalently under the MOTION RELATIONS node.
 The variable is represented as the endpoint of the motion under the OBJECT node.
 The LINK node is required to represent exactly how the OBJECT influences the MOTION.
 In Event 1, for example, the preparatory motion of leaning actually goes into, or bodily fills, the forward space; the completing motion of reaching goes toward, but not into, the forward space.
 Of course the forward space of the preparatory motion can be a different physical area from the forward space of the completing motion: space is forward or backward only in relation to the body.
 The addition of an object in the second pair of events takes us into the interesting problem of representing causal relationships between event units.
 Event 3: A dancer steps and leaps.
 Event 4: A basketball player steps and takes a jump shot.
 Figure 2 shows the visual relationships between the motion of the person, and the motions of the person plus the ball, in Events 3 and 4.
 Schematic representations of these events are given in Figure 3.
 Until point 5 (Fig.
 2) the visual structure of Events 3 and 4 overlap.
 At point 6, the person begins to descend to the ground (Events 3 and 4) and the ball continues to rise (point 7) until it falls at point 8 (Event 4 only).
 In both Events 3 and 4 the person must descend to the ground.
 But the ball has it own, independend motion in Event 4.
 We have in Event 4 two separate motion descriptions to deal with: the person in motion, whose structural description is almost identical to that of Event 3, and the object in motion, which spatially and temporally goes through its own motion.
 We want our representations to mirror the similarity of the person's motions in Events 3 and 4.
 We also want the representation of Event 4 to correspond to the intuition that the basketball player's jump shot, and the basketball's descent through the hoop, are parts of the same event.
 We do not want to be in the position of saying that Event 4 is represented by two loosely joined schematic structures, one representing the players motion and the other the motions of the ball.
 These considerations lead to schematic structures which are very similar for Events 3 and 4, and in which the motions of the ball in Event 4 are part of the higher event of the person's motions.
 Nevertheless, there is a real difference between the ball in Event 4 and the object in Event 2 (the glass which is picked up): the ball has a motion which is spatially and temporally noncoextensive with the motion of the agent.
 In a basketball game people tend to watch the motion of the ball, and for many people, the event ends when the ball goes into or misses the basket, not when the player has descended again to the ground.
 Attaching the ball as a MOTION RELATION to the ACTION of taking a jump shot, as the glass is a MOTION RELATION to the ACTION of reaching/picking up, captures only part of the experience.
 In order to represent these relationships I have described Event 4 as an event unit containing an embedded event unit (Figure 3b).
 As long as an object is carried, pushed, or pulled by a person, so that the object's motion retains a onetoone relationship with those of the person, the object's motion is not represented as a separate unit (ie: the glass in Event 2).
 When the object's motion ceases to have a onetoone correspondence with those of the person, the object'<= motion becomes represented as a separate event.
 However, the object's motion in this case is a consequence of the person's; the ball goes into the basket because the player steps, jumps, and releases the ball in a certain way.
 Players and coaches can often predict at the moment the ball leaves the player's hands whether the ball will hit the basket.
 This de257 Figure 2: Events 3 and k 4* t 1> o 4 > ^ I O o 1 2 ''.
 4 5 6 ? FifOire 3 a.
, Zlver.
t jjerson AOTTCN AGSTI r?EFARATOFY COKFIETIKG I'rYTIOP P.
^LATICrS KC^IOr step 11^: OTiJSST .
7ump RSLATI0K3 .
1 I wit.
^ bend 1 I toward sky 258 ^ 0) X 259 pendence of the ball's motion upon the player's motion is captured by the embedded structure.
 Events 3 and 4 fall into another abstract category of human motion events, runleap.
 This category is especially interesting because the body defies gravity in a visually dramatic way at the center of the completing motion.
 When we are watching just a person in motion we normally watch the person descend to the ground at the end of the leap.
 The event is fully completed only when the person has returned to a position of stability on the ground.
 But in the case of an embedded event in which the object has an independent motion of its own, the eye tends to follow the motion of the object {the bail, for example) once it leaves the person's hands.
 The followthrough aspect of the completing motion is not actually perceived.
 The dunk shot in basketball, however, is an interesting exception.
 In the dunk shot, the player's and the ball's descent occur together temporally and are very close together spatially.
 It is an interesting possibility that the excitement of the dunkshot for spectators is partially due to the synchrony of endings of the embedded and embedding event units (Phillippe Poisson, personal communication).
 Our excitement may arise from our ability, in this particular event, to actually see both the player and the ball return to the ground.
 This excitement would really be an aesthetic kind of excitement: the experience of a perfect fit between the schematic cognitive structure and the particular manifestation of that structure being observed.
 References Labein, Rudolf.
 The Language of Movement: Choreutics.
 London: Macdonald & Evans, 1966.
 Lasher, Margot D.
 "The cognitive representation of an event involving human motion.
" Cognitive Psychology, 1981, 13, in press.
 I would like to thank John M.
 Carroll, Joseph M.
 O'Brien, and Philippe L.
 Poisson for helpful discussions of the ideas in this paper.
 260 Toward a Model of Cognitive Process in Cartoon Comprehension Michael E.
 J.
 Masson and Inga Boehler University of Victoria, Victoria, Canada The comprehension of humorous material Involves an important interaction between use of gencrnl world knowledge and the encoding of new verbal or pictorial information.
 Understanding humorous episodes often requires the comprehender to draw a number of inferences about the characters and events in the episode.
 Unlike comprehension of other tvpes of material, however, these Inferences often are not straightforward nor applied "automatically.
" Instead, a logical series of inferences mav be required, implying a form of problem solving activity.
 This characterization of comprehension of humorous material Is particularly appropriate for multiple frame cartoons.
 Since we are especially Interested In the role of these sorts of cognitive processes In understanding humorous material, we have focused our efforts on cartoon comprehension.
 The process model that we have been trying to develop is based on recent conceptualizations of comprehension processes and on theoretical Ideas about the defining attributes of humorous material.
 We characterize a cartoon as a brief narrative that Is described plctoriallv and linguistically.
 As such, much of the Information learned from reading a cartoon is inferred rather than explicitly stated or illustrated.
 It is further assumed that as a cartoon is processed expectations about upcoming information are constructed, just as in reading ordinary discourse.
 Often these expectations are violated bv some form of Incongruous information, causing a revision of previously Inferred information or at least a reorganization of knowledge about the event being described.
 This revision or resolution of incongruity has been claimed to be an Important element of humor by recen*: theorists.
 In addition, resolution may Introduce further Incongruities which are never resolved.
 We argue that these inferential problem solving processes are of central importance In any account of comprehension or appreciation of humorous material/ In order to specify in more detail the nature of comprehension processes associated with reading cartoon material, we made use of multiple regression modelling procedures.
 We planned to focus on cognitive processes involved in cartoon comprehension and, to a lessor extent, on the characteristics of cartoons that are associated with humor.
 Therefore, we sought to develop regression models that would account for variabilitv of cartoon items on three dimensions: (a) comprehension time, (b) problem solving processes associated with understanding the joke on which a cartoon is based, and (c) degree of humor.
 We selected a set of 6A cartoons sampled from five different syndicated cartoon strips.
 Tlie items were originally published between 1976 and 1978.
 A sample of 35 university students rated (on a 7polnt scale) the degree of difficulty involved in understanding or figuring out the joke on which each cartoon was based.
 This served as a very general measure of the complexity of the problem solving comprehension processes we have postulated.
 Another sample of 56 students was shown the same Items in the following manner.
 First, all frames of a cartoon excipt the List frame were shown together, then the last frame was shown.
 Time required to comprehend each section (first frames an' last frames) was measured.
 In addition, these subjects rated on a 7point scale the degree of humor of each cartoon.
 Cartoons were then classified according to a set of Independent variables representing many characteristics of cartoon items.
 Verbal information variables included number of letters, svllables.
 words, propositions, and sentences and number of speaker transitions.
 Visual information was coded by such variables as number of characters, number of physically transformed characters, change of scenes, activity, and presence of a visual detail whi(h was critical for understanding a cartoon.
 Cartoons were also coded according to whether a possible or impossible incongruity was Introduced In the last frame and left unresolved.
 The logic on which a cartoon was based was also coded.
 Categories included exaggeration, iteration (e.
g.
, a tow truck towing a tow truck), and model theory (the reader interprets an ambiguous statement or situation in the most usual way, then finds that an alternative Interpretation was intended).
 Finally, In order to reflect cartoonists' style differences, the items were classified according to cartoon strips.
 Four regression analyses will be reported.
 In all cases a stepwise multiple regression was used In which variables were added into the regression equation until an optimal adjusted R was reached.
 The first two analyses Involved mean comprehension time on first frames and on final frames.
 The list of Independent variables Included those mentioned above as well as mean rated humor and difficulty in understanding the cartoon's joke.
 We had two general expectations about these analyses.
 First we expected to do a better job of accounting for variability in first frame comprehension times since most of the complex comprehension processes are associated with the last frame.
 For similar reasons we expected the last frame comprehension time regression equation to more heavily weight the difficulty rating variable than would the equation for first frames.
 The optimal adjusted R for the first frame analysis was a very respectable .
9i (multiple R=.
98).
 Eighteen variables were entered although six did not contribute significant predictive power.
 Comprehensio" time increased as a function of number of letters, sentences, and transformed characters in the first frames.
 In addition, relatively small contributions were made by difficulty rating (smallest beta weight of all significant variables) and the variable which coded exaggeration: longer comprehension times were associated with higher difficulty and cartoons based on exaggeration.
 The seven other significant variables were all supressor variables: very low simple correlations with comprehension time, but they accounted for some variability of significant predictor variables which was not associated with comprehension time.
 Most of these suppressor variables were associated with verbal and visual information contained in the last frame.
 The regression analysis of first frame comprehension time successfully accounted for a great majority of variability.
 l*terial of this sort does not normally call for much complex cognitive activity while reading the first frames, and so a few simple variables are sufficient to account for most of the variance.
 Number of letters and transformed characters together produced a regression e<iuation with an adjusted R of .
86.
 Rated difficulty did not play a large role in accounting for first frame comprehension time.
 Finally, it was rather surprising that other visual information variables such as number of characters did not have much Impact.
 It appears that as long as characters maintain a consistent appearance readers require very little time or effort to recognize them, even when first Introduced.
 The regression analysis of final frame comprehension time produced an optimal adjusted R of .
79 (multiple R .
91), with 13 independent variables involved in the equation.
 Only five variables made significant contributions.
 Comprehension time increased with higher numbers of letters in the last frame, raced difficulty, number of new characters Introduced In the final frame, and number of syllables in the first frames.
 Number of syllables 261 In the last frame was a supressor variable.
 As expected, the Importance of problem solving comprehension processes was evident in the analysis.
 Rated difficulty was the second variable entered into the equation for last frame comprehension time.
 In addition, the introduction of new characters in the last frame requried more reading time.
 Reinterpreting Information from the first frames, or using that Information to understand the last frame are important processes since amount of first frame verbal information strongly Influenced last frame comprehension time .
 Since difficulty ratings played such an important role in the comprehension time analyses.
 It would be interesting to discover which variables contribute to the degree of difficultv in comprehending a cartoon.
 The relevant regression analysis indicated that the present data could offer only limited aid in answering this question.
 The optional adjusted R was only .
52 (multiple R = .
85), with 26 variables in the equation.
 Thirteen of the variables m̂ de significant contributions.
 Cartoonists' style played an important role as the first variable entered was the "0/1" variable which coded cartoons as being from "Wizard of Id" versus some other cartoon strip.
 According to the regression model, such cartoons added a full 1.
5 units of difficulty on the 7point scale.
 Cartoons based on iterative logic also increased difficulty.
 Increases in the number of propositions, syllables, or speaker transitions in the first frames also increased difficulty ratings.
 The other seven variables (other cartoons and last frame information) acted as suppressor variables.
 This analysis clearly points to the importance of reviewing first frame Information while trying to comprehend the final frame and basic joke of a cartoon.
 Difficulty was not associated with amount of final frame Information which.
 In itself, is just as straightforward as verbal and visual information contained in the first frames.
 Interpreting the last frame in the context of previous information, however, is a major part of the reader's problem solving comprehension process.
 Finally, what makes cartoons funny? The regression analysis of humor ratings produced a rather low adjusted R of .
60 (multiple R = .
82), so no definite answers are yet available.
 Nine significant variables were Involved, two of which are related to cartoonists' style.
 The"Wizard of Id" and "Hagar the Horrible" were associated with rather high humor ratings.
 These ratings also increased with the number of scene changes in the first frames and the number of speaker transitions in the last frame.
 Adding an impossible incongruity in the last frame seemed to improve the humor of cartoons, but basing a cartoon on a critical visual detail in the final frame was associated with reduced humor ratings.
 The other three variables were suppressor variables.
 Obviously this analysis does not provide a very satisfactory explanation of what makes a cartoon humorous, but it has helped to identify attributes that characterize successful attempts to create humorous materials.
 Our future efforts will be directed at a closer and more detailed study of the problem solving comprehension processes involved in reading cartoons.
 In addition, it is clear that it will be a difficult task to identify the nature of the relationship between humor and these cognitive processes.
 In our data there is presently no clear relation (linear, or otherwise) between humor and difficulty ratings.
 Although we have begun to make progress In the development of d model of cartoon comprehension processes, the secret of the humor of cartoons Is still well kept.
 262 Demon Timeouts Limiting the Life Span of Spontaneous Computations in Cognitive tJodels* Steven Small Department of Computer Science University of Rochester Rcr'estcr, New York 14627 Departement d'Informatique Unlversite Paris VIII Vincennes 93200 Saint Denis FR/OXE Introduction The limitations in human shortterm memory, of whatever extent they are determined to be, must be accounted for in constructing cognitive models.
 The view of this memory as a data (or knowledge) store leads to models with a fixedlength buffer of quickly accessible shortterm data, and general procedures for replacing items in that buffer with other items (see Marcus [1979], for example).
 Another vantage point on this question comes from viewing the this memory in terras of the active probler solving processes of the model.
 This perspective suggests building models with timelimited processes that may not remain active indefinitely.
 Just as the size of an individual constituent in a fixedlength buffer may depend on the nature of that item, so the time limit of an active process (even the units of time employed) must be allowed to depend on the nature of its functioning.
 Every active process in a cognitive model must be associated with another process, called a timeout process, which can force its premature termination (its timeout or expiration) on specific criteria.
 The timeout specifies how long the process (the parent process) may remain active, in terms of specific time units or model events, and in addition, what actions to take (or processes to initiate) on expiration.
 Note the enormous significance of this organization: The *The initial research motivating the ideas described in this report was supported by grant KSG7253 from the National Aeronautics •'ind Space Administration to the University of Maryland.
 During the writing of this paper, the author v.
'as supported by a FulbrightHayes lectureship in Artificial Intelligence at the Unlversite de Paris, and computer facilities were provided by the Institut de Recherche et Coordination flcou.
'Jtique/Husiqiie.
 The support of NASA, the FulbrlghtHayes program, and IRCAM are gratefully acknowledged.
 processing of individual actors in a model can depend on either the existence or the nonexistence of relex'ant Information.
 In terms of human problemsolving, this is analogous to our basing some decision on the explicit knowledge that we do not know something.
 Often the knowledge that we do not know something can be c;s useful to solving a problem as any other sort of knowledge.
 Uord Expert Parsing This kind of approach has been taken in ths modelling of human language comprehension by the I.
'ord expert Parser (l.
'FP).
 UEP views language comprehension as Interactions among a large number of human cognitive processes, including wordbased context analysis processes called word experts, and other mech.
inisms such as belief maintenance, general problem solving, and so forth.
 The system models this understanding as rsmory internet inns through the messagepassing behavior of its different constituent processes.
 Evaluation of the system ought not to be made through its output; rather.
 Its Important aspects are (a) the organisation and representation of the model processes, (b) the order of execution of dependent processes and the concurrence of others, and (c) the messages exchanged anong the processes.
 An Important aspect of UEP is that its processes are not permitted to wait Indefinitely for information they night need to perform their functions.
 In understanding the meaning of a word in some sentence, for example, often a reader requires some knowledge of the context following it.
 How long would a reader wait for a piece of disambiguating information before choosing one of the competing Interpretations of the word? Does this wait depend on general syntactic or semantic criteria, or on the particular words involved and their idiosyncratic couplings with other words? And a last question: How can a model of language understanding (or of any cognitive mechanism) account for this limitation in active shortterm memory processing? As a completely procedural distributed model, UEP does not contain some finite fixed length buffer to represent a shortterm memory, but models the memory limitation with processes that have a strictly limited life span.
 The human understander does not wait indefinitely for information that could aid his/her understanding, and the model cannot either.
 When a process in UEP decides to await some piece of information from another process, a patterninvoked timeoot process is initiated to monitor the duration of the v;ait.
 In the ideal case, the desired information quickly becomes available in the model, and the awaiting process promptly receives it.
 If the information does not appear within a certain time, however, the timeout process must command the awaiting process to go on without it.
 Timeouts The general notion behind these timeouts is a simple one.
 Anytime a cognitive model would ordinarily create a demon, or any patterninvoked process (a spontaneous computation [Rieger, 19771), it should instead create a pair of competing demons, a parent demon and a timeout demon.
 The timeout demon should be guaranteed to trigger within a certain fixed amount of processing by the model as a whole.
 If the parent triggers first, the timeout disappears and the parent process performs its patterninvoked operations.
 If the timeout triggers first, there are two possibilities; either (a) both the timeout and the parent disappear immediately, or (b) the timeout disappears immediately and the parent performs certain special timeout operations and then disappears.
 The timeout operations are processspecific and only execute in the case when their associated patterninvoked process (demon) does not trigger within its allotted life span.
 The result of this arrangement is to place a limitation on the duration of applicability of demons in the model, preventing them from waiting indefinitely for desired information.
 In this way, futile waits for information that will never arrive can be avoided, and excessively long waits  far exceeding human memory limitations  can be disallowed.
 Furthermore, by appropriate use of timeout operations, processes in a cognitive model can be triggered by either the invocation or the noninvocation of some pattern in the memory.
 By not knowing something within a certain time limit of model events, and by knowing about this lack, a system can make valuable inferences.
 Timeout Cri tenia The question oi how long to spend looking for helpful information before going on without it, whether in problemsolving or cognitive modelling, is clearly not a new one.
 How far ought one to search a promising path in a chess tree, or how many associations in a semantic memory ought to be examined, before available knowledge is used to come to some conclusion, even if not the right one? Various answers to this problem have been studied, although from a different perspective than the one suggested here.
 From our vantage point, there are two interrelated questions: (a) What objects or events might be used to trigger demon timeout in a particular cognitive model? And similarly, (b) What sequence of events in the model can be used to measure the duration of the wait for desired Information? 263 The progression of events In a cognitive model depends fundamentally on the nature of the particular activity being modelled.
 In natural language understanding, a person reads words and sequences of words of various lengths, creates conceptual conglomerates, follows character and plot development (in reading a story) or speaker intentions (in participating In a dialogue), makes hypotheses and has some hypotheses fulfilled and others rejected, and so forth.
 Each of these facets of language understanding represents an event that might be used to trigger demon timeout in an understanding model.
 Furthermore, the events could be counted and treated as units of time for measuring durations in the model.
 For a model of government decisionmaking or administrative behavior, perhaps the number of memoranda reaching a particular department would be a good gauge on the progress of the problemsolving activity.
 Another measure might be the number of responses from departments participating In a decision, or from subdepartments of a modelled one.
 Recent history suggests that in modelling government processing, the number of adverse newspaper articles or adverse decisions in other branches of government could be useful.
 Problemsolving systems must not wait Indefinitely for data needed to make inferences; better make a wrong Inference than come to no decision at all.
 The impatience of people in such decisionmaking situations makes this all the more important in cognitive modelling.
 Timeouts in Uord Expert Parsing The processes In the Word Expert Parser limit their wait for relevant information by employing several of the yardsticks mentioned above; i.
e.
, the system maintains counts on certain model actions intended to correspond to relevant events of natural language understanding.
 At present, these include the total number of words read by the system, the number of conceptual conglomerates created by the model, and the number of sentence breaks encountered.
 While these are fairly straightforward measures, our current research will give UEP two new timeout criteria.
 In both cases, the timeout processes might be considered metaprocesses, as their actions are based on the functioning of other processes (rather than on their results or on messages from them).
 The first new waiting criterion causes a timeout on the termination of some model process.
 Thus, a process Bight wait for some information just as long as some other process were still active (and could provide It, for example).
 The moment the specified process terminated, the demon for the awaiting process would expire, and perhaps carry out its special timeout actions before terminating Itself.
 This timeout criterion has been simple to implement.
 The other new waiting criterion causes the timeout of some demon on the creation of an Identical demon (I.
e.
, one awaiting the same information) by another process.
 To put that another way, the system may permit a process to wait for some datum or event just so long as no other process initiates a wait for the same datum or event.
 process can be forced to make some Inference (e.
g.
, the definite noun group has no referent) when the overall understanding process requires It, but not before.
 Ideally, of course, the correct referent would be found before then, and none of this would be necessary.
 Timeout demons exist, however, solely for those situations when the ideal context for making correct Inferences does not present Itself.
 They are a means for deciding when to make an Inference without all the facts being present.
 Summsry An Important facet of general problemsolving, and likewise cognitive modelling, Is how long to spend looking for helpful Information before going on without it.
 In a computer model based on spontaneous patterninvoked processes (demons), there must be a means for limiting the duration (in terms of some measure of model convergence) of their applicability.
 This paper suggests timeout processes as a means of limiting the life span of patternInvoked demons In a cognitive model.
 Every process in a model must be associated with a timeout process, which monitors various specific model events and prevents the process from remaining active indefinitely.
 If the process does not finish its activity before being stopped by its timeout, it may nonetheless perform certain timeout actions before disappearing.
 These actions can make use of the (possibly valuable) information that the trigger pattern for the process never arrived.
 Timeouts thus enable processes to use knowledge about not having certain knowledge to help make important inferences in cognitive models.
 References Marcus, Mitchell P.
 (1979), An Overview of a Theory or Syntactic Recognition Tor Natural Language, AI Memo #531, MIT Artificial Inteligence Laboratory.
 Rieger, Chuck (1977), Spontaneous Computation In Cognitive Models, Cogni tive Science, vol.
 1, no.
 3.
 Small, Steven (1980), Word Expert Parsing: A Theory of Distributed MordBased Natural Language Understanding, TR #954, Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland.
 Small, Steven (1981), Toward a Cognitive tiechanics for Distributed Modelling, Technical Report, Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester (to appear).
 This particular strategy aids in modelling a phenomenon that occurs frequently In natural language comprehension.
 The problem of anaphoric reference illustrates the Issue.
 When a computer model such as UEP begins reading a definite noun group, it ought Immediately to Initiate a reference process to search for the referent of that group.
 How long should this reference process be permitted to search before using available information to conclude its processing? One answer might be that when the understanding of further discourse required knowledge of the referent, the process should come to some decisions immediately.
 The timeout actions of a reference process might provide some default substitute for the desired referent, for example, while at the same time initiating some new process to proceed along a different path based on the (known) situation at hand.
 The timeout of a process allows it to come to some conclusion without waiting indefinitely for data that will insure the correct decision.
 In this example, the timeout of the reference process takes place when the understanding of subsequent text requires information about the searchedfor item.
 In this way, the reference 264 The effects of integrated knowledge on fact retrieval and consistency judgments: When does it help, and when does it hurt? Lynne M Redef CarnegieMellon University and Brian H.
 Ross Stanford University These earlier studies suggest the loliowing tentative conclusions Regardless o( ttie nature ol the (oils, the tan effect is attenuated by the subnode structure afforded by thematically related material.
 That is, having subnodes speeds search by pruning search at inappropriate subnodes Therefore, fan is not computed for the total number of facts learned about a concept.
 I^oreover, viihen the loifs are not thematically related to the learned facts, subjects can also stop search at the appropriate subnode, and circumvent the effect of "relevant fan" (the number ol facts associated with the probed theme), llowever, regardless of whether subjects use a plausibility judgment or must retrieve a specific fact to answier a question, there is stiti a fan effect for the number of themes associated with a concept, i.
e.
, the number of links from the concept node to the various subnodes.
 To understand how we can easily retrieve (acts from memory w e must also understand the limitations of memory Interference has been recognized lor a long time as a major source of forgetting.
 I^ore recently interference has also been shown to affect speed ef retrieval.
 People are slower to recognize a studied fact when other studied facts share some of the same concepts (e.
g.
, Anderson, 1974, 1976; Anderson & Bower, 1973; HayesRoth, 1977; King & Anderson, 1976; Lewis & Anderson, 1976; Thorndyke & Bower, 1974).
 This interference ellect has been called the fan effect by Anderson (1974), because of the underlying representation he assumes to explain this interference phenomenon.
 Specifically, facts are assumed to be represented in a network structure where nodes in the network represent concepts, and links represent relations among concepts.
 Studied facts thai share the same concepts would be represented as propositions with relational links fanning out o( the samo concept nodes.
 Time to retrieve any one fact depends on the lime to activate the entire proposition.
 Activation spreads from various concept nodes until the entire proposition is activated, and it Is slowed down when there are more links that divide the activation (see Anderson, 1976, or Collins S Loftus, 1975).
 This robust fan effect has been under close scrutiny of late (e.
g.
, K/lcClosky & Bigler 1980; Ivloeser.
 1977, 1979; Smith, Adams, S Schorr, 1978) due to the paradoxicat implications of the effect.
 The paradox is as follov/s: An expert knows more about the topic than a novice, and w e would expect an export to be able to answer questions about that topic faster than a novice Yet according to the theory, the more one knows about a p.
̂ rticular topic, the more potential interference to that topic, and the slower should be retrieval of any given fact.
 Smith, Adams, and Schorr (1978) and f^oeser (1977; 1979) partially demystified this paradox by showing that when the facts associated with the particular concept are themselves thematically related, there does not seem to be any interference among them with respect to lime to verify the truth of one of these facts.
 Reder and Anderson (1980) showed that this atlenuation of the fan effect only occurs when subjects can make plausibility judgments rather than explicit fact retrieval judgments (e g , when foils are not thematically related to the tacts studied).
 Reder and Anderson propose a prepositional network with the additional assumption that related facts are stored in a subnode structure attached to individual nodes Recognition and consistency judgments use the same representation and activation process, but require the subjects to use dillorent criteria When subjects are not lorcod lo retrieve a specific fact, because the foils are not thematically related, subjects stop search at Ihc appropriate Ihcmalic subnode.
 This subnode model accounts lor another Reder and Anderson linding; Subjects were slower lo verify a fact the more themes there were associated with the fictitious individual.
 The interference effects did not drpend on the number of facts about the themes unrelated to the one specifically queried, only the number ol irrelevant themes.
 This model also explains a similar result of McClosky and Bigler (1980) There is other empirical support lor the notion that people will answer a question by judging plausibility, when asked lo make recognition judgments, (Reder, 1980.
 1981).
 In everyday situations, people make plausibility judgments rather than trying to decide if a specific fact has been presented to them W e usually do not have to discriminate something that was said to us Irom something that is true but is an inference or a paraphrase of something that we heard.
 There were two basic motivations for the research to be reported in this paper: The first is to extend and replicate previous research to insure that there really is a fan effect for number of themes.
 The second is to examine the effect of relevant fan when subjects are asked to make consistency judgments W e expect a neoative fan effect in the consistency condition rather than an attenuation of tiie effect.
 The more relevant facts that are available Irom which to sefect in order to make a consistency judgment, the faster a subject can find enough information to make a judgment.
 The fact that there was only an attenuated fan effect with unrelated foils may rellect a mixture of plausibility fudgments and direct retrievals when asked to make a recognition judgment.
 In addition to the recognition blocks, (one block with thematically related toils and one with unrelated foils), and the consistency judgment blocks, we also included another kind of judgment which we call theme judgments O n these trials subjects see the fictitious individual's name (e.
g.
.
 Marty) and a theme or topic name (eg.
, shipchristening) W e expect subjects to stop at the theme node lor both types ol judgments.
 The latter condition serves as a check on the processes used for consistency judgments.
 Method Procedural Overview' There were two major phases in the experiment; study and test.
 In the initial study phase, subjects learned sets ol facts about various characters This phase included an initial presentation of facts for each character, organized by theme.
 Then subjects studied and were tested on the materials using two sets of dropout procedures, so that they could recall the facts studied about each character Subjects with below a 9 0 % criterion of final recall were excluded Irom the analyses.
 In the critical phase, the test phase, reaction times to make various types of judgments about the learned material were collected, with each judgment type tested in a different block.
 The three judgments were recognition judgments with (oils thematically related lo the sentences actually studied about the probed character, recognition judgments with loils unrelated lo the material studied about the probe character, and consistency judgments (whether the probe was consistent with what had been studied).
 Intermixed among these various test blocks were theme judgments, where subjects would see a character name and a theme name, rather than an entire sentence.
 Both speed and accuracy were emphasized.
 Subjects were told to respond as fast as they could while remaining very accurate.
 Feedback was given after every trial.
 This descriplion musl be brief due lo space limitations, lor a fuller description.
 consult Reder and Ross (in preporation) 265 Table 1 Results Examples of Studied Facts and Test Questions # olfacts in the three themes 321 Alan bought a ticket lor the train.
 Alan heard the conductor call "All aboard".
 Alan arrived on time at Grand Central Station Alan added bleach to the rinse cycle, Alan sorted his clothes into colors and whites.
 Alan fell while skiing down the steepest stretch.
 110 Brian watched the freaks In the side show.
 Brian wanted to major in psychology.
 400 Steven called to have a phone installed.
 Steven read and signed the lease.
 Steven unpacked all ol his boxes.
 Steven mailed out change ol address cards.
 330 James compared 5 different model cars.
 James paid the car dealer in cash.
 James put the license plates on his car.
 James checked the Amtrack schedule.
 James arrived on time at Grand Central Station.
 James watched the trains from the platform.
 Recognition Target Consistency Target (Yes) (321) Alan bought a ticket lor the train.
 Reaction times were truncated to 5 seconds and missing cells replaced with RTs of 5 seconds.
 An analysis of variance was performed separately on each of the eleven task types because the variances are not the same in the different tasks.
 The data have been collapsed in different ways to analyze different aspects of the experiment, each of which can only be summarized here.
 RECOGNITION RT sec 2.
7 2.
5 2.
3 2.
1 (a) with Related Foils (.
16) (19) (19) ^  (09) (.
13) (lO) (b) with Unrelated Foils  Targets  Foils (03) (05) (.
06) I i 1 2 3 1 2 Relevant Fan Figure 1.
 Mean reaction times (and proportion of crroni) as a lunction of relevant fan in the recognition blocks.
 First consider the recognition blocks, shown In Rgures 1 and 2 (with the percent error listed above each point).
 There is no effect of relevant fan in the unrelated foil block.
 For the thematic foils , reaction time increased v;ilh relevant Ian and, as in Reder and Anderson (1980), the targets in this block showed an effect of relevant fan on accuracy.
 As the number of themes associated with the probed character increased, reaction Ijme increased for the targets in both recognition blocks, but not for the foils.
 Foil Inconsistent (No) (110) Brian unpacked Unrelated all of his boxes.
 Foil Thematic (Yes) (33 0) James bought a Related ticket for the train.
 (321) Alan train (3 21) Alan circus T h e m e judgment (True) Theme judgment (False) Design and Materials Table 1 illustrates some of the material that a subject might see.
 There were several factors that define the condition within which a particular probe is tested: relevant Ian (one to four facts related to the probe), theme Ian (one to three themes learned about each character), and irrelevant fan (zero to live lacts, irrelevant to the probe, that were also learned about the probed character).
 The test variables were type ol judgment required (recognition with related foils, with unrelated foils, consistency judgments, and theme judgments) and probe type (target, foils, and thematic, the latter defined only for consistency judgments).
 Some examples are illustrated in Table 1.
 Study and foil materials were constructed for each of the 33 subjects randomly.
 RECOGNITION RT sec 2.
9 2.
7 2.
5 2.
3 2.
1 (a) with Related Foils I " ^ _ ('« >'M^)  y ^ ' (.
13) 1 (b) with Unrelated 1 Foils •  • — .
 .
 (04) , « _ Targets  Foils (.
14) j / ^ • • (06) ,.
.
J.
 2 3 2 G Theme Fan Figure 2.
 Wean reaction times (and proportion of emra) as a function of tfieme fan In the recognition bloclts.
 N o w , consider the results from the consistency blocks of trials, shown in Figures 3a and 4a.
 Reaction times are plotted only for target (presented) sentences and lor thetnatically related sentences that were not studied, because the unrelated statements cannot be plotted as a lunction ol relevant Ian.
 There is a significant negative Ian ellect lor thematic statements, siich that subjects are taster to make a consistency judgment the more lacts they know on the relevant topic.
 Reaction times also decrease (or targets in the consistency block.
 There is a signilicant effect for both targets and themes on accuracy, siich that subjects are also more accurate the greater the relevant Ian.
 The number of themes associated with the probed characters, collapsed over the three probe types, show a fan effect.
 266 RT sec 3.
0 2.
8 2.
6 2.
4 2.
2 (a) Consistency Judgments (<i)  \ • \ I \ : K M22) (09) • ( 1 2 ) , • \x04) ^ (b) Theme Judgments Targets  Thematic (25) (10) (.
10) 1 2 3 1 2 3 Relevant Fan Figure 3.
 Mean teaclion limes (and proportion of errors) as a function of relevant fan in the consislerKy block and for the theme judgments.
 Theme judgments (Figures 3b and 4b), like consistency judgments show a significant negative fan effect for the relevant theme for the positive judgments.
 There is a strong positive (an effect of number of themes.
 In no task was there an effect of the irrelevant fan on reaction time.
 Iwlore important, perhaps, is the finding that fan facilitates question answering when exact fact retrieval or recognition is not needed, in the consisilency and theme judgments.
 This is a tjetter resolution of the paradox of the expert than a finding that fan need not hurl retrieval time Rather, we have found that knowing more actually speeds decision lime in many situations.
 Our explanation for a negative Ian effect (see Reder, submitted, and Reder S Ross, In preparation, lor a more thorough explanalion)is that the more facts attached to the subnode the stronger the link to that subnode.
 In other words, rate of activation is not only a function of the number of links to a concept but the relative strength of various links.
 Strength of a link is a function of its usage (usage depends on the frequency that the link is traversed), and recency of last usage.
 In fact, the experiments reported here manipulated strength independently, and found support for this notion of dillerential strength of arcs affecting response time.
 For space considerations, that result was not discussed here.
 Those results will be described in detail in Reder and Ross (in preparation).
 In summary, we have learned that experts are not hampered by knowing too much for several reasons: first, experts organize their information into more specific subtopics.
 This is reasonable, because experts understand their topic area well enough to appreciate subcategories Second, experts are not asked whether they recognize having been told a specific fact; rather, they are asked to judge whether something is true or something is plausible.
 Therefore, they can use their redundant knowledge ip order to speed judgment.
 References RT sec 2.
9 2.
7 2.
5 2.
3 2.
1 (a) Consistency Judgments m (30) _ (29) .
 ^ ^ (13) _ (08) ^__,,^ « "^(09) (08) (b) Theme Judgments — Targets  Thematic •  Foils (13) (13) Theme Fan Figure ̂.
 Mean reaction limos (and proportion of errors) as a function of theme Ian in Ihe consistency block and for theme iudgments.
 Anderson, J.
R.
 Retneval of prepositional information from longterm memory.
 Coonitive Psychology.
 1974, 5, 451 474.
 Anderson, JR.
 Language.
 Memory, and Thought.
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
: Lawrence Eribaum Associates, 1976.
 Anderson, JR.
, and Bower, G.
H Human Associative l^emorv.
 Washington: Winston & Sons, 1973.
 Collins, A.
tvl , and Loltus, E.
F.
 A spreading activation theory of semantic processing.
 Psychological Review, 1975, 82, 407428.
 HayesRolh, B.
 Evolution ol cognitive structures and processes.
 PsvcholOQical Review, 1977, 84, 260278.
 King, D.
R.
W.
, and Anderson, JR.
 Longterm memory search; An intersecting activation process Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior.
 1976,15,587606.
 Lewis, C.
H.
, and Anderson, J.
R.
 Interference with real world knowledge Cognitive Psychology, 1976, 7, 311335.
 IvIcCloskey, M.
, and Bigler, K.
 Focused memory search in (act retrieval.
 Memory & Cognition.
 1980, 8(3), 253 264.
 Discussion The conclusions that can be drawn from this pattern of data are straightforward.
 First, w e have a better understanding of the conditions under which Ihe fan ellecl is obtained The fan effect is obtained only when subjects cannot use plausibility to answer the question, when subjects are asked to find a specific fact in memory and Ihe foils are Ihemalicilly related In other situations, the strategy is to try to decide il a statement is true using consistency judgments, regardless of whether or not subjects are asked to make consi jloncy iud()nienls or in fact askrd to ni.
ike recognition judgments.
 This result has been lound elsewhere (Reder, submitted; Rodor S Anderson, 1980).
 The suggestion of a fan effect due to the number of themes (K/tcCloskey & Bigler, 1980; Reder & Anderson, 1980) has been confirmed and extended.
 W e found, when controlling for total number of lacts studied, that the number of themes associated with Ihe character positively affects reaction time.
 Moeser, S.
D The role of experimental design in investigations ol the Ian ellect.
 Journal of Experimental Psychology; Human Learning and Memory.
 1979, 5, 125134.
 Reder, L.
M.
 Plausibility Judgments vs.
 Fact Retrieval: Efficient Strategies lor Question Answering.
 Paper presented at meetings of Ihe Psychonomics Society, Nov.
 1980.
 Reder, L M , and Anderson, J.
R A partial resolution of the paradox of interference: The role of integrating knowledge.
 Cognitive Psychology.
 1980, 12, 447 472.
 Reder, L M.
, and Ross, B.
 A resolution of the paradox of interference: The role ol integrated knowledge in fact retrieval and consistency judgments.
 (In preparation.
) Smith, E E.
, Adams, N.
, and Schorr, D Fact retrieval and the paradox of interference.
 Coqnilive Psychology.
 1978, Ifl, 438464.
 Thorndyke, P.
W.
, and Bower, G.
H.
 Storage and retrieval processes in sentence memory.
 Cognitive Psychology.
 1974,5,515543.
 267 A QUESTION ANSWERING MKTllon OF EXPLORING PROSE COMPREHENSION: AN OVERVIEW Arthur C.
 Grnesser California State University.
Fullerton I'lhen Individuals comprehend prose, they construct a large number of Inferences and expectations.
 Where do these Inferences and expectations come from? it Is believed that generic srhemas provide the background knowledge that Is needed to generate inferences and expectations.
 The schemas correspond to different knowledge domains and levels of structure.
 There are schemas for objects, actors, event sequences, goal oriented activities, and so on.
 During comprehension the coraprehender Identifies a variety of schemas.
 When a schema Is Identified, It guides the interpretation of explicit input as well as the construction of Inferences and expectations.
 There are several schemabased models in psychology and other disciplines In cognitive science.
 Psychologists have typically Investigated global issues regarding schemas in comprehension.
 They have rarely specified detailed representations and symbolic procedures.
 However, during the last four years the Cognitive Research Group at Cal State i^ullerton has ventured into a detailed and very timeconsuming project.
 We set out to explore the following problems: (1) To identify the Inferences and expectations thnt comprehenders generate when a passage is comprehended.
 (2) To trace the constructive history of specific inferences and expectations when a passage is comprehended online.
 (3) To formulate a system for representing knowledge.
 (4) To map out the content and structure of schemas which are Invoked when a passage is comprehended.
 (5) To examine how conceptualizations in generic schemas are passed to the representation of a specific passage.
 (6) To assess whether behavioral data can he explained by properties of passage representations and the process of constructing these representations.
 The behavioral tasks Include question answering, recall, and inference verification.
 We have analysed both narrative and expository passages.
 However, the most extensive analyses have been on short narrative passages such as the following: The Czar and His Daughters Once there was a Czar who had three lovely dnughfers.
 One day the three daughters went walking in the woods.
 They were enjoying themselves so much that they forgot the time and stayed too long.
 A dragon kidnapped the three daughters.
 As they were being dragged off, they cried for help.
 Three heroes heard the cries and set off to rescue the daughters.
 The heroes came and fought the dragon and rescued the maidens.
 Then the heroes returned the daughters to their palace.
 When the Czar heard of the rescue, he rewarded the heroes.
 Conceptual Graph Structures It is believed that knowledge can be represented in the form of conceptual graph structures.
 A graph structure is constructed when an individual comprehends a passage such as the Czar story.
 Both explicit statements and inferences are structurally interrelated in a graph structure.
 Similarly, the content of generic schemas are represented as conceptual graph structures.
 In our representational system, a graph structure is a set of Libeled statement nodrs which are interrelated by labeled, directed arcs.
 A statement node Is roughly a proposition.
 Each statement node is assigned to one of six node categories: Physical State, Physical Event, Interna] State, Internal Event, Goal (which includes actions), and Style.
 For example, three heroes heard the cries and set off to rescue the daughters has the following four statement nodes: (l)lnternal Event: heroes heard cries (2)Physlcal State: there were three heroes (3)Goal: heroes set off (4)Goal: heroes rescue daughters There are five categories of labeled, directed arcs: ReaBnn(R), Inltiate(I), Manner(M), Consequence(C), and Property(P).
 These arcs Interrelate the nodes.
 The above four statements would be interrelated as follows: For a more complete description of this representational system, see Graesser (1981) and Graesser, Robertson, and Anderson (1981).
 One distinctive feature of this representation Is that it captures differences between p.
onlorlented structures (with Goal nodes.
 Reason arcs, and Initiate arcs) and causallyoriented structures (with Event nodes.
 State nodes, and Consequence arcs).
 A Question Answering Method of Exposing Implicit Nodes A question answering (Q/A) method has been used to expose Inferences and expectations.
 After comprehenders read a passage, they answer why, how, and whathappenednext (WHN) questions about each explicit statement In the text.
 The answers Include a large number of Implicit nodes.
 An implicit node is analyzed if it is produced as an answer by at least two comprehenders.
 Thus, the ideosyncratic answers are eliminated.
 When comprehenders are probed with questions after reading a passage, the inferences in the Q/A protocols are classified as preserved nodes.
 There is a large nvimber of preserved nodes in a short passage such as the Czar story.
 In our analyses, there were 189 preserved nodes.
 Therefore, there were 10 unique Inference nodes for every explicit node.
 Conceptual graph structures were composed from the set of explicit nodes and inference nodes.
 Constructing Graph Structures Online It is possible to trace the constructive history of each node in a passage structure.
 This is accomplished by manipulating the amount of passage context that a comprehender receives before a statement 15 probed with questions.
 In a No Context condition, passage statements are probed out of context.
 The inferences generated in this condition are classified as statementdriven (SD).
 In a Prior Context condition, passage statements are probed online; the comprehender reads only the passage content up through the target statement and then the statement Is probed.
 Inferences in this condition are classified as priorcontextdriven (PCD) If they are not SD.
 In a Full Context condition, the comprehender reads the entire passage before the passage statements are probed.
 Inferences in this condition are subsequentcontextdriven (SCD) if they are neither SD nor PCD.
 On the basis of these context manipulations we traced the constructive history of each inference node (answer to why or how question) and expectation node (answer to WHN question).
 Each implicit node was classified on the basis of the first explicit node In the passage which activated the implicit node.
 Of the preserved Inference nodes, 61% were SD, 34% were PCD, and only 5% were SCD.
 Consequently, the online representation of a target statement accounts for 95% of the inferences associated with the statement; subsequent context adds verv little.
 268 i;LA^ Sonetlnes Implicit nodes are generated sometime during comprehension , but are later dlsconfirmed.
 There were 108 dlsconfirmed nodes In the Czar story.
 Erroneous SD nodes were usually disconflrmed by subsequent context, rather than being blocked by prior context.
 We traced the entire evolution of the conceptual graph structures as passage statements are interpreted incrementally, statement by statement.
 This analysis Included both preserved nodes and inference nodes.
 The analysis of the Czar story revealed that established conceptualizations are rarely restructured as new Information is received.
 New nodes were rarely Inserted Inbetween old nodes; erroneous old nodes were rarely removed from chains of old nodes that end up being preserved.
 Instead, new nodes were appended to old nodes; erroneous nodes and node chains were pruned from old structures.
 A prunlng+appendlng mechanism explained much of the online construction of graph structures for narrative.
 Schema Content and Structure A free generation plus Q/A method has been used to map out the content and structure of schemas.
 Consider a DAUGHTER schema.
 Individuals in a free generation group write down typical actions and attributes of daughters.
 Free generation nodes include all statements that are produced by two or more Individuals.
 A second group of individuals participate in a Q/A task.
 Each of the free generation nodes are probed with a why and a how question.
 The final set of nodes include all statements produced by at least two Individuals.
 Conceptual graph structures are then prepared for schemas such as the DAUGHTER schema.
 We have identified 31 schemas that are relevant to the Czar story.
 The content of these schemas has been analyzed using the free generation plus Q/A method.
 Twenty of these schemas were classified as microstructure schemas because they referred to explicitly mentioned actors, objects, actions, or properties (e.
g.
, HERO, PALACE, KIDNAP, ATTRACTIVENESS).
 There were 11 macrostructure schemas which were derived from the text on the basis of our intuitions (e.
g.
, GOODNESS, FAIRYTALE, RETURNING FAVOR).
 The number of nodes per schema varied from 32 to 187 with a mean of 93 nodes.
 The number of free generation nodes varied from 3 to 22 with a mean of 13.
 Therefore, the Q/A task exposed most of the schema content.
 Passing Schema Nodes to Passage Representations Among the 31 schemas relevant to the Czar story, there were 2883 nodes.
 Only 362 of these generic nodes matched an inference node in the passage.
 There were three types of matches between Inference nodes and schema nodes.
 Exact matches accounted for 9% of the matches.
 Most of the matches (86%) Involved an argument substitution, as shown below: Schema node: person get exercise Inference node: daughters get exercise Some matches (5%) were more complex.
 Since only 13% of the schema nodes were passed to the conceptual graph structure for the passage, a substantial number of schema nodes are somehow eliminated.
 We are presently examining symbolic mechanisms that might explain which generic nodes are passed to the passage structure.
 The schemas accounted for most of the nodes In the Czar story structure.
 For 79% of the implicit passage .
 nodes, there was a match with a node in at least one schema.
 For 74% of the Inference nodes, there was a match with a node in at least one microstructure schema; there was a match with a node in at least one macrostructure schema for 31% of the inference nodes.
 On the average, an Inference node had a match with 1.
7 schemas.
 We are presently examining how schema structures are synchronized with structures of passage excerpts—as passage statements are comprehended online.
 Question Answering, Recall, and Verification Ratings Do the conceptual graph structures correspond closely to human conceptualizations? One way to assess this is to examine whether the structures explain behavioral data.
 We have extensively examined patterns of data in three tasks: question answering, recall of explicit information, and verification of nodes in the graph structures (see Craesser, 1981; Graesser et al.
, 1981).
 The results of these analyses have been encouraging.
 We assumed that specific symbolic procedures are invoked in any given behavioral task.
 Most of the symbolic procedures were written in the form of a production system.
 A production system operates on a conceptual graph structure and thereby generates expected output.
 Hopefully, the expected output would match closely to the obtained behavioral output.
 For example, we formulated production systems for specific types of questions.
 The production system for one type of question follows different paths of arcs and nodes than does that of another type of question; the expected answers would therefore be different for the two types of questions.
 The production systems and graph structures have together accounted for 90% of the specific answers to specific questions.
 Final Comments We have been Impressed with the Q/A method as an empirical technique for exploring comprehension.
 The method can be used to drag out the implicit knowledge that is part of passage representations and schemas.
 The method can also be used to trace the process of constructing structures while passages are comprehended online.
 Our research has uncovered dozens of informative trends which have Important implications.
 However, It is beyond the scope of this presentation to report many of the interesting observations (see Graesser, 1981).
 It suffices to say that the data are sufficiently rich and distinctive to discover new pieces to the puzzles of comprehension.
 References Graesser, A.
C.
 Prose comprehension beyond the word.
 New York: SprlngerVerlag, 1981.
 Graesser, A.
C, Robertson, S.
P.
, & Anderson, P.
A.
 Incorporating inferences into narrative representations: A study of how and why.
 Cognitive Psychology, 1981, 13, 126.
 269 ROLE OF CONTEXT _IN COGNITIVE DEVRLOPMENTI Cldeon Carml, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel (Theoretical Exposition and Preliminary On Experiments) Purpose and SiRnificance The purpose of this study is to contribute both theoretically and practically within the area of cognitive development and conceptualization.
 We will discuss the effects of manipulating concept supporting and conceptdistracting perceptual cues on performance in cognitive tasks  an area which has been virtually ignored by Piaget and his colleagues.
 We propose two main effects: 1) that the manipulation of perceptual cues will rê 'eal the capability of both low and middleclass socio economicalstatus (SES) children to reason concreteoperationally well before the ages posited by Piaget, or posited by investigators of cognitive functioning of low SES children, once and perceptual dressing of the standard tasks is made more digestible to these children, 2) that by exposing these children to an effectively spaced sequence of perceptually varying tasks which lead up to standard Piagetian or Piagetlike tasks, they will perform successfully also on the latter, again well before the posited age range for such performance.
 This is intended to serve as a model for accelerating cognitive functioning in general, whether at school, in everyday life or in vocational training.
 From a theoretical standpoint, we propose to contribute thereby towards the crystallization of a model of cognitive development which integrates the "cognitivechange position" of Piaget and others, with the "perceptual change position" of Odom and others (Odom, 1978).
 This model  which could be called a "cognitiveperceptual position" has been emerging out of field work in "Creative Maths and Science Teaching" with low SES children In lsrael2 (197681), In Venezuela3 (197881), Costa RicaA (1981) and BrasilS (1981).
 This model takes account of the perceptual input as an additional dimension to cognitive processing, yet is closely and causally Interwined with the latter.
 Our model is a continuous model from which Piaget's stagelike structures should, in principle, be derivable without further assumptions as a result of sudden overlaps of continuously changing regions.
 Piaget's experiments are seen as isolated points, each on another continuous dimension along wliich a "sallence"paramenter and changes.
 This model leaves ample room for cultural, social and other differences in cognitive development, especially in the attainment of stagelike behavioral criteria.
 The model also indicated the theoretic tools for explaining and predicting such differences.
 Its major significance should be seen in its potential to provide a theoretical basis as well as practical tools for examining and accelerating cognitive and conceptual development, especially for disadvantaged children.
 1.
 Supported by the Ford Foundation and by the Israeli Ministry of Education.
 2.
 Project Petakh (PP), short for "development of thinking", directed by G.
 Carmi at the Department of Science Teaching at the Hebrew University, Jerusalem, and sponsored by the Israel Ministry of Education.
 This study is with 36 teachers in Jerusalem and with several replication groups elsewhere.
 3.
 Ciencia Creatlva (CC), (Creative Science), directed and implemented by CENAMEC (Centro Nacional para el Mejoramiento de la Ensenanza de la Ciencia), with the author as principal investigator.
 This is an adaptation of PP in Venezuela.
 4.
 Ciencia Creatlva (CC), directed and implemented by CEMEC (Centro para el Mejoramiento de la Ensenanza de la Ciencia of Costa Rica), with the author, G.
C.
, as principal Investigator.
 This is an adaptation of PP.
 5.
 Ciencia Creatlva (CC), pilot sponsored by CAPES, Ministry of Education, Brasll wth the author, G.
C.
, as the principal investigator.
 This is an adaptation of PP.
 270 CONCEPT FORMATION THROUGH THE INTERACTION OF MULTIPLE MODELS Mark H.
 Burstein Yale University INTRODUCTION This paper is about some of the processes involved in learning the fundamental concepts of a new domain.
 In particular, I have been studying how people learn some of the basic concepts used in computer programming, given little or no prior experience with the use of computers, or computer languages.
 The goal of the research is to build a computer model capable of learning such basic concepts.
 The problem is that most current theories are either too weak or combinatorially explosive.
 Generalization techniques [4,6) do not construct radically new conceptual structures.
 Concept clustering techniques [2] require correlations over large sets of data.
 People learning what a computer variable is must learn something radically new to them, but with very limited experience.
 How can they do this? The theory I am developing is based on the study of transcripts of 1onl tutorial sessions with several subjects learning the programming language BASIC, collected over a period of several months.
 The subjects lacked any previous experience with computers, but even the youngest.
 Perry, age 10, had a number of preconceptions about what was to be learned, and a wealth of knowledge and experience in other domains which he used to provide correlates for experiences and observations in the new domain.
 Learning to program a computer is a rather "formal" subject, requiring the development of expertise in symbolic manipulation.
 Thus one might readily expect prior knowledge of mathematics to be useful in learning to program.
 Indeed, our subjects often drew parallels to concepts in mathematics when learning programming concepts.
 Perhaps less expectedly, however, our subjects also invoked a great deal of common sense world knowledge when learning to program.
 This common sense knowledge included such diverse areas as putting objects in boxes, moving pieces around on a game board, and writing on blackboards.
 This work was supported in part by the Advanced Research Projects Agency of the Department of Defense, monitored by the Office of Naval Research under contract N0001475C1111, and in part by the National Science Foundation under contract IST7918463.
 It also included knowledge of English, and of how agents perform tasks requested of them.
 In this short paper, I hope to at least give some idea of how these other areas of expertise were used to form some very basic concepts of computer programming.
 HOW ARE CONCEPTS IMPORTED? One of the techniques a teacher can use to explain an unfamiliar concept is to use analogies or metaphors (5).
 For example, a coromon way of introducing the concept of a computer variable is to make an analogy to boxes and their contents.
 One introductory BASIC manual phrased it this way: (1) To illustrate the concept of variable, imagine that there are 26 little boxes inside the computer.
 Each box can contain one number at any one time.
 11] Another text referred only to: "location^" inside the computer, but illustrated the concept with diagrams showing contiguous rectangles containing numbers.
 Both of these descriptions suggest that essentially the same set of relations and operations that exist between containers and their physical contents can be applied to variables and their:"contents".
 However, this is not the only way to describe variables.
 Another common description is based on similarities to concepts in elementary algebra.
 (2) In ordinary algebra, letters of the alphabet are ofter used for terms that can take on varying numerical values.
 BASIC has a very nice, builtin algebraic feature that allows the user to assign numeric values to any letter of the alphabet.
.
.
 The user can set the value of A by typing A=10.
 [3] While each of these models suggests a number of things that are true for variables, neither of them tells the whole truth and nothing but the truth.
 Although each analogical notion of variable presented suggests enough of the truth to act as an initial, working model of the functioning of variables in computer programs, they also suggest hypotheses which are either irrelevant or wrong, or both.
 Since neither model is sufficient to give the learner an understanding of how to use variables, or how they will work in all situations, each model must be "debugged".
 [9] That is, having seen the metaphor, the student is presented with simple problems to be solved or new situations to be understood in the new domain, which he attempts to solve using hypotheses suggested by the metaphor.
 This leads to some successes, and a number of failures.
 Interestingly enough, the failures provide the most useful information about how the developing concept must be modified so that it agrees with firsthand experience.
 [7,8] The causes of the failure must be fixed must be fixed to produce useful expectations in the future.
 USING MULTIPLE MODELS One kind of modification that can be made to an inaccurate model is to add restrictions to prevent specific erroneous inferences.
 For example, there are no inherent restrictions on the number or kind of objects that can go in boxes.
 Variables, on the other hand, can hold only one thing at a time.
 Hence, a statement of that restriction must be added by the teacher, as in (1) above, or by the student after an error occurs.
 A more important kind of modification of the developing concept is to introduce additional models or analogies.
 These additional analogies can be used to explain and/or to replace faulty inferences made by earlier versions of the new concept.
 The new analogies also allow additional inferences and expectations to be made.
 For example, a second extremely common analogy for computer variables and computer memory is human memory.
 The following is an example of such a statement: (3) The computer "remembers" any values assigned to numerical variables.
 Of course, the values of the variables can be changed at any time — simply do the variable = value command again.
 [3] This metaphor for computer memory comes from the same text that contained the algebraic description of variables, (2), above.
 As we will see shortly, such secondary models can and do affect the hypotheses which can be generated.
 271 These examples illustrate the use of multiple mpdels in describing a new concept.
 This is not unusual.
 Rather, it nay be the norm.
 Furthermore, the students will add metaphors and models of their own discovery, based on chance word choices, observed consistencies, and inferences they made.
 A model of learning must explain how these analogical descriptions can be "combined" when forming new concepts.
 GENERATING ERRONEOUS HYPOTHESES Here are some examples of the kinds of errors and corrections that occur when a student has several models for the same concept.
 In the following examples, M is myself, and P is the student.
 Perry.
 Perry was initially given a short paragraph to read which said that the computer's memory used variables which were like boxes in which one could store numbers.
 STORING THE PROBLEM WITH THE ANSWER M: Suppose I wanted to add up 7 and A and store it in X.
 P: How? You want to put 7+4 or the answer? H: I want to put the answer in.
 P: You want him to tell me the answer and then put it in? M; Well, just put it in.
 P: You write.
.
.
 X equals 11.
 You can write X*7'»A M: You can do that too.
 Try it.
 P: (types X'=7+A) M::Ok.
 Now what's inside the box called X7 P: 7 plus 4, .
.
.
 11.
 You want me to ask him? M: Yea, why don't you ask him? P: (types PRINT X) oh.
 11.
 It doesn't matter.
 If you want him to only answer 7+4, and not the answer, can it do that? M: No, it only stores one number in each box.
 P: He thinks you only want the answer.
 M: It's not that, it's just that what you put in the box was not "7+4", but U .
 It adds it up and then puts the answer in the box P:;Oh.
 It doesn't put 7+4 in the box.
 Perry produced the following summary of that description: AH INITIAL HYPOTHESIS P: Yea.
 This, the variable, is the box, and you tell it to.
.
.
 It's where he puts his memory and everything and then you ask him to put it in there.
 You say the word (variable), and then he puts it in.
 M: Right, ok.
 So suppose 1 wanted to tell him to remember the number 5 in variable X.
.
.
 P:;Oh.
 What do you mean X? In any box that he wants? This shows that for Perry, variables were related to (human) memory, and that they were somehow like boxes which you put things in.
 His last statement also shows that he already had the concept of an algebraic variable, since here he thought X stood for the unknown.
 This fact will be important in other examples.
 Using the box metaphor.
 Perry tried to investigate directly the class of objects that can be placed in the computer's "boxes".
 Since physical objects can certainly hold other physical objects, he thought that the boxes in the compter might be able to hold other:"boxes".
 STORING BOXES IN BOXES — another (partially) wrong hypothesis.
 P: Can he store a box in a box? Let's say you tell him X=7+4, and then you make him another box and tell him to store X, the box X into the other box.
 H: You can't put boxes inside boxes, but you can put what's inside them in another box.
 Another error made in trying to specify what can go into the boxes comes from the use of a second metaphor.
 As this was also supposed to be a model of the computer's memory.
 Perry often generated hypotheses consistent with his knowledge of human memories.
 Since people, when asked to solve simple arithmetic problems, will generally remember both the question and the answer, Perry assumed that the computer would as well.
 The addition of semantic cues to the names of variables caused Perry to assume that the computer was even more like a human agent, with humanlike memory capabilities.
 Here, he wonders whether the computer has the ability to querry it's "framb" for a person in several different ways.
 THE COMPUTER AS HUMAN AGENT M: 1 can say FERRY=10.
 How old are you? P: 10 M:;Ok, and now if I PRINT PERRY.
 P: It will say 10 M: Right.
 P: If you tell him.
.
.
 Let's say Perry is 10 years old.
 Can you say that? And then you ask him "How old is Perry?" or.
 "Who is 10 years old?", will he answer you? Finally, there is the case in which several of Perry's models make conflicting predictions, and he is asked to choose which one is correct.
 In this example, the two models are the box metaphor (assignment is like putting something in a box) and presumed similarities to the algebraic notion of equality (A=10 means A is the same as 10), which Perry inferred from the use of the equal sign to denote assignment in BASIC.
 If assignment is like moving something into a box, then moving something from one box to another should remove it from the first box.
 However, if assignment is like algebraic equality, then the statement Q=P should mean that the two variables have the same value.
 After I had typed P=10 and then Q=P, (causing both Q and P to have value 10), the following dialogue occurred: GENERATING CONFLICTING HYPOTHESES M: So, what's in P now? P: ;0h.
 Nothing.
 M: Nothing? P: 10! and then Q is also.
 M: What do you think it is? Is it nothing or 10? P: Let's find out.
 First let's see.
.
.
 M: Well, what do you think it is? P: If you have two boxes, and you moved.
.
.
you moved or it equals to? You moved what's in P to Q so there s nothing in it, or did you only put the same number in Q that's in P? 1 think it's 10.
 M: You think it's 10? P: Because you don't say that, um, move P at all.
.
.
 take P out.
 You only said that Q equals the same as P.
 So if it equals, it has to be 10, because if there's no 10 in it, Q wouldn't equal to it.
 272 Clearly, there ii great indecision here about which model is going to prove correct.
 Only after reviewing both choices does he finally chooses the one which makes the correct prediction.
 This exanple clearly shows Perry operating with at least two distinct models of the what a variable is.
 Each model is capable of making a number of predictions which are useful.
 Each makes predictions which must be corrected.
 Thus, corrections are possible not only when a preferred model produces an error, but whenever two models contradict each other.
 In both cases, more questions are raised to guide inference experiments in the "model debugging" process.
 In this example.
 Perry was forced to reiterate the two models so that he could reevaluate his choice, and find the one that seemed most consistent with the situation and his beliefs.
 In this case, the answer 10 seemed preferable due to the use of the phrase "Q equals P".
 My goal is to develop a computer model capable of learning concepts radically different from those it already has, without requiring huge amounts of exemplary data.
 The technique suggested by the protocols is to maintain a set of models that are all partially useful, but which occasionally contradict each other.
 Much of the learning arises from the correction of the failed expectations of these models.
 However, these failures can occur even without the student "making a mistake".
 Contradictory expectations generated by competing models may provide an important alternative source of errors for the debugging process.
 REFERENCES [11 Albrecht, R.
, Finkel, L, and Brown, J.
R.
 (1978).
 BASIC for Home Computers.
 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
, NY.
 (2) Dietterich, T.
G.
 and Hichalski, R.
 S.
 (1979).
 Learning and generalization of characteristic descriptions.
 Proceedings of IJCAI79, Tokyo, Japan.
 [31 Heiserman, D.
L.
 (1981).
 Programming in BASIC for Personal Computers.
 PrenticeHall, Inc.
, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
 [41 Kolodner, J.
L.
 (1980).
 Retrieval and organizational strategies in a conceptual memory: A computer model.
 RR*187.
 Ph.
 D.
 Thesis, Yale University New Haven, CT.
 (51 Lakoff, G.
 and Johnson, M.
 (1980).
 Metaphors We Live By.
 The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
 [61 Lebowitz, M.
 (1980).
 Generalization and memory in an integrated understanding system.
 RR*186.
 Ph.
 D.
 Thesis, Yale University, New Haven, CT.
 [71 Papert, S.
A.
 (1972).
 Teaching children thinking.
 Programmed Learning and Educational Technology, Vol.
 9, No.
 5.
 [81 Schank, R.
C.
 (in press).
 Dynamic Memory: A theory of learning and reminding.
 [91 Sussman, G.
J.
 (1973).
 A computational model of skill acquisition.
 AlTR297.
 Ph.
D.
 Thesis, MIT, Cambridge MA.
 273 A Simulated World for Modeling Learning and Developmc.
it Pal Langley, David Nicholas, David Klahr, and Greg Hood' Carnegie Mellon University 1.
 Introduction The creation of a complete intelligent system is a goal of many researchers in cognitive science and artificial intelligence.
 An elegant path to realizing that goal »/ould be to lei a system develop its intellect through interactions vi/ith the environment Recent work in perceptual and motor skills has brought these hopes closer to fulfillment, but we are still many years from constructing systems that can adequately interact with the real world.
 In this paper w e describe a simulated world for developing and testing models of learning and development.
 Such a facility could play an important role in the emerging field of cognitive science, since It would encourage researchers to construct complete systems, and since it would provide a co m m o n ground on which competing theories might be compared Below w e summarize the aims of the project and the design criteria for the simulated environment Alter this, we present an overview of the simulated world and of the sensory/effector interlaces through which model organisms may interact with it W e close with a brief discussion of the interlace between the user and the environment.
 2.
 Aims of ttie Research The simulation system described here was conceived by, and for.
 cognitive scientists representing a variety of theoretical biases and paradigms.
 Its purpose is not to embody particular assumptions about complex inlormation processing (human or otherwise), but rather to provide a medium for empirical research that can be shared by and tailored to the needs and goals of •• as wide a range of investigators as possible.
 2.
1.
 Focus on Learning and Development The major goal of cognitive science is to understand the nature of intelligence.
 However, the knowledge and strategies responsible for intelligent behavior vary with time Since any science searches for invariant regularities of behavior, this presents a difficult problem lor our field Langley S Simon (1981) have argued that we may find the desired invariants in a theory of learning and development, and preliminary steps towards a theory of the transition process have been taken by Klahr & Wallace (1976).
 among others.
 Theories of tearing and development can be characterized as having h«o problems to solve First, they need to account lor behavior at several different points in a develoomental progression.
 Second, they must account lor the mechanisms that enable the system to progress from stale to state The quality of the transitional theory is constrained by the quality of the theory that accounts lor behavior at each state One natural consequence of this argument is a focus on "expert" or "mature" performance: such models provide an ultimate target for the transitional processes, and would thus appear to have top priority in theory building efforts.
 iy,lx However, w e believe that this emphasis has resulted in an unfortunate limitation.
 The contact between current computer simluation models and an empirical base is almost exclusively via adult performance measures, and often skilled adults, at that.
 To the best of our knowledge, none of the currently proposed mechanisms lor taking a system from state N to state N + 1 could plausibly have brought the system to state N in the first place.
 That is.
 most models have little aevelopmental tractabilily.
 although they may provide a reasonable account of the learning mechanism in an already well developed system.
 The Kjeas piespnied here pvolvPd out of the interactive ellorts oi the CMU v/o'i I Modelers GiouD.
 in Ahich jgime Cntbonell has piavd a m.
i|Of foio and ĥich h.
TS included H3ris E'̂ rlinef, GfCg Hanic r.
ltity Herman, and Gienn Iba, in addition to the pr̂serrt authors In order to remedy this situation, we need to ask questions about inlant systems, about the rudimentary encodings and internal representations, and about the innate kernal of self modifying processes.
 W e think it is important to attempt to lomulale developmental theories in which the ability to undergo self modification in a plausibly supportive environment is the priirtary constraint on system design, with performance a problem to be solved within that constraint.
 (The converse is almost universally the case with modern theories of sell modification: performance models come first, with sell modification added on in ingenious ways.
) The simluated world proposed here would facilitate such an effort W e envision our simulation system as a tool for investigating any of several domains of knowledge development, including form perception, object constancy, problem solving, or quantitative processes.
 2.
2.
 Constructing Complete Systems A standard approach in science is to partition a phenomenon and study the pieces separately.
 In cognitive science, we find researchers specializing in language processing, problem solving, perception, and many other areas.
 And though this division of labor has clarified much about the components of intelligence, it has revealed little about their interaction.
 For example, researchers in language acquisition have separated that form of learning Irom concept lormalion and word learning, despite their strong interplay.
 Similarly, problem solving theorists have ignored perceptual and motor factors, though they may significantly influence the dilliculty of a problem W e feel enough is understood of the components to initiate attempts to construct complete intelligent systems.
 A second argument for creating complete systems comes from representational consideralioi^s As long as one focuses on only an artilicinlly bounded subset ol behavior, the input of the system must be specified by the user Thus, one might build a system with apparently general learning mechanisms, but which would learn only when presented with careluHy hand crafted data The construction ol a complete system should guard against such subtle kludges, since information would be obtained through direct interaction with the environment or by inlerencP": '*•system made itself.
 2.
3.
 Simulated Worlds vs.
 Real Worlds The ideal complete intelligence would be a robot, with sensory abilities for perceiving the real world and motor abilities for affecting it.
 Unfortunately, we are still far from understanding perceptual and motor behavior in the necessary detail This leads us to propose the less impressive but more manageable option of devising a simulated environment The notion of a simulated world has its own attractions, including its relative independence of hardware and its transportability between sites, making it an ideal tool for cognitive scientists to employ in their model construction.
 It also eliminates the computational constraint that cognitive processing be done in real time.
 3.
 Criteria for a Simulated Environment In order lor the simulated world to be useful as an experimental tool in cognitive science studies of learning and development, the following points were considered central design criteria: • Independence and richness The world model must be truly separate from the organisms and their internal "models" of the world Moreover, the world must be sufficiently rich and unpredictable, so that no organism can internalize a complete model ol the world in its lifetime.
 In particular, the environment should be much richer than either Becker's (1970) grid universe or Winograd's (1972) blocks world This is crucial, since the real world elicits qualitatively different behavior than would a completelyinternalizable world (where table lookup and formula evaluation would sulfice for perfect behavior).
 • Extensibilily and consistency • The world must be extensible in terms of introducing arbitrary numbers of new objects and new organisms However, physical laws must remain invariant.
 274 http://Developmc.
it• Crosssensory correlation The world model should support multiple sensory media, and each organism can.
 in principle, be designed to take input from any subset of the sensory media.
 Cross medium sensory correlations play a central role in theories of perceptual and cognillve development, and yet few computational studies of this phenomenon have appeared to date.
 • Multilevel sensory interlaces •• In order to satisfy the objectives o( different researchers exploiting the same worldmodel tool, interaction between the world model and the organisms should be mediated via sensory and effector interfaces, whose purpose is to provide the organism with data (or effector functions) specified at the desired level of abstraction.
 • Synchronous processing  The environment should not be lorced to stop in order lor the organisms to think at their leisure.
 Therefore, if the organisms are unable to process all incoming input, the focus of attention problem is introduced as an integral aspect of cognition.
 • Communication among organisms The only communication possible is via the sensory and elfector interlaces (by gestures language, etc.
), requiring organisms to pay attention in order for the communication to take place.
 In formulating the above criteria we considered various issues w e wished to research using the simulatedworld environment.
 For instance, learning purposive action is a basic function in most higherlevel organisms, including human "rational" thought.
 W e wished to provide organisms with basic drives (e.
g.
, hunger, curiosity, companionship of like organisms, etc.
), basic actions, and learning mechanisms.
 Exactly what the starting point for learning processes ought to be is a matter or research and/or discretion according to the phenomenon one wishes to investigate.
' For example, one type of purposive action is to learn subsumption goals (Wilensky, 1978); e.
g.
, secure more of a resource (such as food) than presently required to satisfy an internal drive • if past experience has shown that the drive will recur and finding the resource may be an uncertain or costly operation.
 Another is to posit intrinsic satisfaction from the simple, repeated execution of activities: e.
g.
, Piaget's "circular reactions.
" 4.
 An Overview of the Simulated Environment The simulated three dimensional environment contains objects of two types: primitive (the building blocks of the physical domain) and complex (hierarchical structures, aggregates of primitive objects).
 Every physical structure, including the manifestations of organisms in the simulated world, is either a primitive or a complex object.
 Polygon Normal ^  ^ — Cente vecto ^<J^^ Circle Cylinder Figure 1.
 Primitive Objects Sphere 4.
1.
 Primitive Objects Figure 1 illustrates the four types of primitive objects (polygon, circle, cylinder, sphere) and the spatial parameters that must be defined lor each.
 A polygon is specified by an ordered list of One must bo carelul in researching learning by simulating autonomous organisms not lo fall into the sell organising system fall.
icy Early Al research in le.
lrning postulated enlromely simple learning mechanisms and a virtual tabula rasa with respect to real vvorld knowledge, wilh the enpodalion that such a system could organize itself into a thinking entity The only paiallel of such a "magical" feat in the real world is the evolutionary process, but this process required billions of ye.
lis, billions of qeneialions of organisms, and millions ol individual organisms pei geneiation Our world model is designer! with the objective of modeling developmental learning where a single organism can team purposive action in a traction ol its llletime As such, il ifquiics a non zeio stalling poinl with some innate abilities, a high comniumcation hand width wilh the r«ternal world, and built in drives to locus its altenlion and guide its t>ehavior (at le.
rsl initially) vertices, a circle by the coordinates of its center, a radius, and a normal vector, and so on All primitive objects have an additional set of physical properties that must be specified: mass, center of mass, velocity, angular velocity, elasticity, static and dynamic coelficients of friction, temperature, taste, color, and texture.
 Turning Axis Hvoling poini »^ ^ f l b z ^ ^ > [ M l r:.
,v<i oi:^:»» Anis * Turning Point Axis Pivoting Turning Point Twisting Fixed Sliding *"' Figure 2.
 Joint types used in complex objects 4.
2.
 Complex Objects The joining of primitive objects to one another, in any of the several ways shown in figure 2 (joints may be fixed, sliding, pivoting, or W/isting), produces a complex object  an organized structural hierarchy within which properties may be shared and which may be acted upon by the physical laws of the environment as a single unit.
 A joint may be broken, and the complex object separated into two (reorganized) hierarchies, by the application of force in excess of that joint's prespecified sfress limit.
 A fifth, or "virtual," joint type may also be employed, when two objects are touching and not moving relative to one another (i.
e.
, in static contact).
 Consider the example of a table with a coffee cup resting on it.
 A typical table has four legs and a top: four primitive objects (long, thin cylinders) connected by fixed joints to a fifth (a circular or polygonal plane).
 The cup may be broken down into its body and a handle: the former a hollow cylinder closed at one end by a circle of equal radius, and the latter three more cylinders connected to resemble three sides ol a square A virtual joint connects the two complex objects, so that if a gentle force is applied to the table it will take the cup with it when it moves (depending, of course, on the exact magnitude and direction of the force, the frictional coefficients of the table top and the bottom of the cup, the inertia of the cup, etc.
).
 4.
3.
 Physical Laws The simulated environment must be "updated" at the start of each quantum of time.
 The positions of objects need to be adjusted, based on previous velocities and the application of forces: stresses on joints must be computed and, if necessary, objects fragmented.
 In short, changes that have resulted from the influences of objects (including the model organisms) upon one another  or from some alteration introduced from without, by the user  must be incorporated into the description of the current "state oftheworld.
" This is accomplished by applying (recursively, to complex objects and their components) a set ol simplified physical laws: rules for the modeling of relatively gross interactions in the environment.
 5.
 Sensory and Effector Interfaces Organisms must interact with the simulated environment in a manageable way that can be tailored to the needs of the researcher As figure 3 illustrates, the sensory and effector interfaces (also called sensory motor interfaces, or S Mi's) are independent of both the organisms and the extnrnal world model.
 The primary reason for this decision is that different researchers should be allowed to define the level ol abstraction of the sensory information detected by each class of organism.
 Hence, a researcher interested in language acquisition can "plug in" a symbolic visual interlace that provides the names and locations of objects in the visual field of the organism (in order to relate objects and actions to words and sentences) However, a researcher interested in perceptual or motor learning can substitute a lowerlevel interface that provides only collections of features for visible objects or yet lower level visual data "decompiled" from the world model by the sensory interface.
 The same design principle holds for effector interlaces.
 275 — — Organism  h S Ml  \ — — Oganism / SMI  h — Physical Environment Organism Writlen by user Usei replaceable Physical Laws y^ n«ecl User Defined Commands Standard modules provided ^ User Interlace Figure 3.
 M o d u l e s of the System We believe that the sensory and effector interfaces should themselves be subjects of research.
 As an example of the problems that arise in designing a sensory interlace, consider the fact that human beings can tell »/ith precision the location of nearby objects, but can only place approximate values on the absolute location of more distant objects This phenomenon seems crucial lor some forms of generalization For example, it does not matter if a predator is 1001 or 1003 feet away the organism should flee; however, in reaching for an object that is 1 or 3 feel away, different actions are called for.
 Therefore, the perceptual mechanism that accentuates the latter difference, while glossing over the former, appears to be a desirable feature.
 6.
 The User Interface To exploit the advantages of a simulated world it is essential to have a powerful user interface Of major importance is the ability to view the world as an observer within the world would see it.
 In our implementation, the user may create multiple windows, each of which is a perspective drawing of the world from a different viewpoint These viewpoints may be fixed, or they may be bound to the "eyes" of particular organisms within the world so that the window accurately portrays the image seen by the organism.
 A graphical display also allows the user to easily construct new objects and organisms differing in physical characteristics.
 In addition to having commands for controlling the windows, the user must also be able to control the motor and verbal behavior of certain organisms that function as teachers (ol other organisms).
 The interface should allow the user to specify actions as high level commands instead of cumbersome primitives (such as forces to be applied at certain joints).
 Simulation of the world also enables a detailed record of events to be kept lor later examination by the investigator.
 Assuming the cognitive states of the organisms are saved periodically, such a record could be backed up to a certain point in time and the simulation restarted, providing a valuable opportunity to explore alternative courses of action.
 7.
 References Becker, Joseph D.
 An informationprocessing model of intermediate level cognition.
 Stanford University Department of Computer Science Allvl119, f\4ay, 1970.
 Klahr, David & Wallace, J.
 G.
 Cognitive Development: An InformationProcessing View Hillsdale, N.
J.
: Lawrence Eribaum Associates, 1976.
 Langley, Pat & Simon, Herbert A The central role of learning In cognition.
 In J.
 R Anderson (ed.
), Cognitive Skills and Their Acquisition.
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
.
 Lawrence Eribaum Associates, 1981.
 Wilensky, Robert.
 Understanding goal based stories.
 Yale University Department of Computer Science Research Report 140, September, 1978.
 Winograd, Terry Understanding Natural Language.
 New York: Academic Press, 1972.
 276 Why Do We Do What We Do? James A.
 Galambos and John B.
 Black Yale University Abstract We examined the reasons people give for the actions in routine events and classified them as action enablement, main goal satisfaction, or external.
 We argue that the external reasons indicate that some actions in events are stored at more general levels in memory than the specific event schemas.
 There has been a recently rekindled interest in the relationships between the goals of common activities and the structure of our knowledge of these.
 A num.
ber of researchers (Schank & Abelson 1977, Wilensky 1978, Graesser 1978, Lichtenstein & Brewer 1980) have argued that the goals of familiar events n;ay have stereotypic plan paths associated with them.
 In this paper we exanine the goals and plans for a large number of common activities in the hope of isolating some of the parameters which effect their knowledge representation.
 We chose thirty common events for analysis.
 These included events such as the familiar GOING TO RESTALRANTS activity, as well as SHOPPING FOR GROCERIES, GOING TO MOVIES, CHANGING A FLAT TIRE, BREWING SOME TEA, WASHING CLOTHES.
 WRITING A LETTER, etc.
 For each event we picked twelve component actions which described the event from beginning to end.
 We chose them with the constraint that they not overlap temporally in the performance of the event and that they be at about the same level of description.
 For example, some of the component acticns for the grocery shopping event were MAKE A LIST, GET A CART, LOAD THE CART, GO TO CHECKOUT, etc.
 This level of description was felt to be neither too molar (containing a number of discernable actions) nor too molecular (specifying finegrained motor movements).
 These same stimulus materials have been used in a number of other experiments investigating the structure of memory for events.
 In the course of those studies, a number of norms were collected including the importance or centrality of the component actions for the event, the frequency of performing the action when doing the event, the sequential order of the actions and finally the frequency of being in the event when performing the action.
 This last measure I have called the distinctiveness of the action to the event.
 For example the component action EAT THE MEAL is not very distinctive to the restaurant event since the action of eating is done in many other situations.
 In this example the distinctiveness of the action and its importance to the event are orthogonal in that eating is highly important to the event but not highly distinctive.
 In contrast the action SEE HEAD WAITER is highly distinctive to the restaurant event because it is done almost exclusively in that situation.
 Distinctiveness of an action can be seen as a measure of the extent to which that action has an independent existence outside the context of the event.
 This factor will figure in our discussion of the results.
 The present study involved presenting subjects with eventaction pairs and asking them to write down their reasons for performing the action in the context of the event.
 The original intent was to use the results to develop superordination and subordination relations among the actions as has been done in studies by Graesser and Lichtenstein & Brewer.
 There are a number of methodological differences between this study and the others.
 Perhaps the most salient of these is the absence of a particular instantiation of the events and their components via the presentation of a videotape or story depicting the event.
 Our subjects were asked to rely on their 277 knowledge of the events to help them provide their reasons for the actions.
 When subjects are presented with an instance of an event, they understand it by interfacing their general knowledge of that type of event with the explicit details provided by the story.
 The results of testing memory performance for that story must be interpreted as some function which includes contributions from both the specific details and the preexisting knowledge base.
 A further source of potential variance arises from reconstructive strategies which occur at the time of testing.
 Most research in this area has attempted to minimize the effect of the specific detail in the story by devising stimulus materials which are as dull and boring as possible.
 This is cited as a methodological virtue because dullness is thought to indicate that the story matches the most typical or least deviant plan path through the actions in the event.
 While this general technique had yielded a great deal of insight into comprehension and memory for text, it is important to note that the knowledge base for an event prior to instantiation may differ significantly from the representation that results from its application to the task of understanding a particular instance .
 Specifically, our underlying knowledge of common events is flexible enough to permit a wide variety of different realizations of those events.
 For instance, while the restaurant event may often occur in contexts where the primary goal is to satisfy hunger, it also occurs in the service of other overriding goals such as to celebrate some notable happening, or to conduct some business, or to fulfill a desire for an evening s entertainment.
 Performance of the event under these differing circumstances may alter the salience of certain actions in the event by changing the internal goal structure and consequently the plan paths connecting the component actions.
 By analyzing the reasons that subjects give for the actions it is possible to outline the range of flexibility in the representation of events as goal directed.
 The type of reason 278 given for an action can be an index for the sort of goal that governs its presence in the event.
 Furthermore when subjects give more than one type of reason or do not agree highly as to the the best reason then it is often possible to glimpse some of the parallel goals underlying the event.
 A first step in this analysis is the categorization of the reasons into general types.
 Clearly this analysis has a number of methodological difficulties.
 This free generation paradigm tends to lead to idiosyncrasies in the responses obtained.
 However in an exploratory experiment such as this such lack of constraint can be considered a virtue.
 It is often the response which is the outlier in a frequency distribution which can provide an important insight.
 With this in mind we attempted to organize the reasons into three types.
 The first we call the action enablement type.
 It is this type of reason that Graesser and Lichtenstein & Brewer examine and is the most common type.
 This type of reason mentions immediately subsequent actions in the event.
 For instance in the CHANGING A FLAT event the the most common reason for the action of GETTING THE JACK mentions the subsequent actions of POSITIONING THE JACK and RAISING THE CAR.
 There are different types of enablement which when used to construct internal goal hierarchies result in different kinds of structures.
 Some of these enablement relations reflect or perhaps underly a fairly strict temporal sequence of actions.
 Discontinuities between the action sequences and the enablement structures often reflect segmentations that can be considered as the scenes of the event (Schank & Abelson, 1977).
 The second type of reason we will consider is often given for the actions that immediately precede these points of discontinuity.
 Our second type of reason we call, main goal satisfaction.
 A reason of this type involves mentioning the main goal of the event.
 This is often accomplished by merely restating the name of the event.
 For instance, in the WASHING CLOTHES event the segment which includes the loading of the washer and putting in the soap appears to conclude with the action TURN ON WASHER.
 The reasons given for this action are "to wash the clothes" or "to get clothes clean".
 There is little mention of reason concerned with the enablement of the subsequent actions involved in drying the clothes.
 While this result is useful in specifying the relations of lower level event goals to the main goal of the event it also poses a problem for those who attempt to account for the serial order of the action on the basis of goal structure.
 The problem is that there are rather glaring gaps in the representation which must be bridged by some means other than internal plan paths.
 It is however outside the scope of this paper to consider possible ways to close these gaps.
 There are many instances of reasons of this second type which are given for actions that are not at scene boundaries.
 The presence of these further argue for a flexibility in the event representation whereby actions may or may not be dominated by in* ̂ rnal goals depending on the parti' ilar instantiations of the event.
 The final member of our typology of reasons is called the external variety.
 External reasons are those which mention very high level goals such as preservation of health, cleanliness, avoidance of danger or legal and social punishment, and maximization of pleasure or enjoyment.
 Some of these reasons are related to goals for which the event itself functions as fulfillment.
 Others are general modes of operation such as to preserve money.
 For example, in the GROCERY SHOOPING event the reasons for the action CHECK THE PRICE were "to save money for other things", or .
"to avoid being cheated.
" Externa] reasons often tended to be the outliers we spoke of earlier.
 It is these actions which were often more general in the sense that they could occur in other events.
 Furthermore since the external reasons provided points of connection with more general goals they often offered a delimitation of the set of occasions for the performance of the event .
 By a more detailed examination of the interaction of the kinds of high level goals which could govern the entry into the event with the internal goal structure it ma> be possible to specify a range of acceptable variation in the types of stories which count as instances of the event.
 This in turn may provide a way to constrain the representation of events so as to attain the desired flexibility without losing the important aspect of stereotypy which binds different instances of the same event.
 Schank (1980) proposed a theory which satisfies these two criteria.
 One of the important points in this model is the restriction of the role of the script representation.
 These structures have been stripped of any information which can be generalized out of the script and stored at higher levels in memory.
 In our terms this would mean that the event level of representation would contain only those actions and goal relations which were incapable of of directly fulfilling higher level goals or those which never occur except in the context of a particular event.
 Although it remains to be worked out in detail there is important support for this view which arises from the results of our analysis of reasons into the three types.
 It appears that those actions which received reasons of the external type are just those which are susceptible of generalization.
 Further support for this claim comes from looking at the relation of the distinctiveness rating of an action with the type of reason given for it.
 It turns out that highly distinctive actions are those which receive exclusively internal reasons and the less distinctive actions are those which have reasons which refer to higher level goals.
 Recall that the distinctiveness factor indicates the extent to which an action exists outside of a particular event.
 Thus the correlation of distinctiveness and type of reason provides evidence for the concept of generalizing information out of the script representation.
 Furthermore a careful analysis of the types of reasons given for actions may lead to a principled way to carry out this project.
 In this paper we have attempted to argue for the importance of recognizing that the representation of common events must provide for a wide range of 279 variability.
 Indications of this range can be obtained by examining the various purposes for the component actions.
 Our rough taxonomy of reasons has yielded some evidence in support of a model of memory representation which permits such variability While there are still a number of important issues which must be addressed, it appears that there are a number of theoretical benefits for considering why we do what we do.
 Graesser, A.
C.
 How to catch a fish: The memory and representation of common procedures.
 Discourse Processes.
 1978, 1, 7289.
 Lichtenstein, E.
H.
 & Brewer, W.
F.
 Memory for goal directed events.
 Cognitive Psychology, 1980, 12, 412445.
 Schank, R.
C.
 Language and memory.
 Cognitive Science.
 1980, 4, 243284.
 Schank, R.
C, & Abelson, R.
P.
 Scripts, plans.
 goals.
 and understanding.
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1977.
 Wilensky, R.
 Understanding goalbased stories.
 Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Yale University, 1978.
 280 A n ActivationTriggerSchema M o d e l For the Simulation of Skilled T y p i n g David E.
 Rumelhart D o n a l d A .
 N o r m a n D e p a r t m e n t of Psychology and P r o g r a m in Cognitive Science Center for H u m a n Information Processing University of California, S a n Diego L a Jolla, California 9 2 0 9 3 W e thank Eileen Conway, Donald Genlner.
 Jonathan Grudin, Geoffroy Hinlon, Paul Rosenbloom, and Craig Will for their assistance and many discussions with us on the nature of the typing data, their work in collecting and interpreting typing errors, and their discussions on the underlying response nnechanisms Genlner has provided a large set of keypress reaction lime data.
 This ongoing research and the several large corpora of data on typing performance have been of considerable assistance to us in the preparation of this paper (The several studies will be published as separate research reports.
) Research support was provided by the Office of Naval Research and the Naval Air Development Center under contract N0001479C0323.
 Requests for reprmts should be sent to David E.
 Rumelhart, Program in Cognitive Science C015, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, 92093, U S A Abstract We review the major phenomena of skilled typing and propose a model of the control of the hands and fingers during typing.
 The model is based upon an ActivationTriggerSchema system in which a hierarchical structure of schemata directs the selection of the letters to be typed and, then, controls the hand and finger movements by a cooperative, relaxation algorithm The interactions of the patterns of activation and inhibition among the schemata determine the temporal ordering for launching the keystrokes To account for the phenomena of doubling errors, the model has only "type" schemata  no "token" schemata  with only a weak binding between the special schema that signals a doubling and its argument.
 The model exists as a working computer simulation and produces an output display of the hands and fingers moving over the Keyboard and it reproduces some of the major phenomena of typing, including the interkeypress latency times, the pattern of transposition errors found in skilled typists, and doubling errors Although the model is clearly inadequate or wrong in some of its features and assumptions, it serves as a useful first approximation for the understanding of skilled typing.
 The Basic P h e n o m e n a of Typing The fundamental phenomena fall into three categories those involving timing of keystrokes, those involving errors, and those Involving the general organization of the typing process In this paper we simply list the phenomena In a larger version of this paper, the individual phenomena are discussed and illustrated in detail (Rumelhart & Norman.
 1981) I: The liminE of keystrokes A People can type very quickly.
 B Cross hand interstroke intervals are shorter than those within hands.
 C Within hand interstroke intervals appear to be a function of the reach from one hand to the next D The time for a particular interstroke interval can depend on the context in which it occurs E There is a negative correlation between the inier\als on successive slrokesespeci.
illy uhen the alternate strokes CK'Cur on alternate hands II: PiKern of Errors A Transposition errors B Doubling errors C.
 Alternation reversal errors D Homologous errors E Capture errors F Omission errors G Misstrokes III: The general organization of typing A Skilled typists move their hands towards the keys in parallel B The units of typing seem to be largely at the word level or smaller C Sequences involving cross hand strokes seem to take longer to program than those involving only within hand strokes A Model of Typing We have constructed a model that has the following properties: I.
 control of action sequences by means of schemata; 2.
 selection of appropriate motor schemata through a combination of activation value and triggering condition; 3.
 the representation of letter typing by means of a pure type theory (i.
e.
, one with no typetoken distinction).
 4.
 the need for distributed (local) rather than concentrated (central) control of movement.
 The basic framework that we follow is called an Activation Triggered Schema system (ATS).
 The model consists of a set of schemata, each with activation values.
 A schema has an activation value that reflects the total amount of excitation that it has received.
 When appropriate conditions have been satisfied, a schema may be "triggered," at which time its procedures become operative and control whatever operations they specify.
 Figure 1 illustrates the basic structure of the model.
 The model incorporates the A T S system plus specific control mechanisms for the activations and selection of particular hand and finger movements.
 The input of the model is a string of characters that constitute the text to be typed The output is a sequence of finger movements, either displayed on a visual computercontrolled display as the movement of the hands and fingers over a typewriter keyboard, or as a series of coordinate locations for the relevant body parts.
 Figure 2 illustrates the basic assumptions of the activation process using the word very as an example.
 First, the schema for the word is activated by the perceptual system and parser This, in turn, activates each of the child schemata for keypresses.
 E^ch keypress schema specifies the target position, with position encoded in terms of a keyboard centered coordinate system.
 These target positions are sent to the response system which then must configure the palm and finger positions properly.
 Each keypress schema inhibits the schemata that follow it.
 This means that proper temporal ordering of the keypress schemata is given by the ordering of the activation values.
 In addition, the activation values are noisy, which leads to occasional errors.
 J PDiilm RlWMC SlilW *• ActiMtiM Figure 1.
 T h e information processing system involved in typing.
 281 tesponse System ;eypress tchemata Vord ichema t i l l h i M I RESPONSE SYSTEM iniervals.
 Moreover, the correlation of model limes wllh actual typing times for the 66 most c o m m o n bigrams from our data with the data of 6 subjects yields an overall correlation between the model and the averaged data of about 0.
86.
 The fit is not bad.
 however, the model clearly does not account for all that is happening (Data for five of these subjects were collected by Donald Gentner.
) The model does produce errors in typing, the most important ones being transposition errors, doubling errors, and misstrokes The proportion of errors in the model is determined by the amount of noise in the activation levels.
 In our subject's data we observed transpositions at about a rate of I for every 1800 keystrokes.
 W e adjusted the noise level to yield errors at a rate of about I for every 30 keystrokes.
 Despite the large difference in rate, the basic pattern of errors is similar.
 For example, a large majority (76 percent) of the transpositions in the simulation occur across hands This is about the same as our subject and comparable to values reported for others.
 At the level of noise employed in the simulation, 17 doubling errors were generated.
 igure 2.
 The interaction of activations when the word very is to ; typed.
 Inhibition is shown by the lines with solid circles at their rmination.
 The response system feeds back information to the keypress system about the current location of the fingers Whenever the current fmger position is within some criterion distance of its target position, and the relevant schema is the one most highly activated, then the triggering conditions are satisfied and the actual keystroke IS launched.
 Repeated letters imply that there are no token schemata.
 A doubling error occurs when a word that contains a doubledIctter is typed, but with the wrong letter doubled: bokk instead of book A n alternation error is similar: thses instead of these.
 The doubling error has two major implications.
 First, it implies that there are special schemata thai sign.
nl the existence of doubled letters, and that occasionally these schemata get applied to the wrong letters; the binding between the doubling schema and its argument is weak Second, the doubling error implies that each letter can only have a single keypress schema; only "types," no "tokens" In the model, the arguments are not bound to the schemata, but are established via activation values.
 After a keystroke schema has been triggered (and after the resulting launch of the keystroke), this keypress schema can become "bound" to a doubling schema if one exists with a higher activation value than its own Because activation values are noisy, occasionally this leads to errors in the linking of keypress schemata to a doubling schema (The existence of alternation errors leads to essentially the same conclusion.
) Movement In the model, each active schema pushes its relevant hand and finger toward its desired key at the same time, and the final overall configuration is determined by the competition among these forces.
 Each schema pushes with a force proportional to its activation level.
 As a result, the forces are weighted so as to cause the letter schema that is next in line to be typed to approach its key most quickly.
 The actual location of each finger is determined by the sum of the extensions of the finger and the hand To type a particular typewriter key, it is only necessary that the end position be correct.
 The endpoint configuration is reached through an iterative relaxation process that only involves local computation Because of the unequal weighting of activations, the process will eventually cause the most highly activated schema to move its fingerpalm configuration to within a criterion distance from its target key, satisfying the trigger conditions and launching the keystroke.
 Appraisal In order to evaluate the model, we gave it a text of slightly over 2.
000 words to type.
 The pattern of keystrokes and limes were collected from the simulation and analyzed in exactly the same fashion as we had analyzed the data from our human subject.
 Overall, the fit of the model to the many phenomena of typing is good Detailed analyses of the model performance indicate that the simulation results do show about the light pattern of interstroke Conclusion We have constructed a working computer simulation of a model that captures the appropriate spirit of the phenomena observed with human typists, although it does not yet offer a complete account of the typing process.
 Despite the lack of an internal clock or "metronome" for liming, the model provides a reasonably good account of the timing patterns observed among skilled typists, including the prediction of negative correlations among successive keystrokes, a characteristic of metronome models In similar fashion, there are no specific context dependencies built into the model and yet the time that it takes to strike keys depends upon the context in which they occur.
 W e have no specific stored timing patterns for specific words, yet the model predicts that words have characteristic time profiles.
 W e have no specific mechanism for transposition errors, yet our model generates the correct types of transposition errors.
 Moreover, the coordinative structure assumed within the model yields a qualitative emulation of the pattern of overlapping movements shown in a high speed film of a typist.
 A number of conclusions can be drawn from our studies.
 First, the existence of doubling errors strongly implies the existence of a pure "type" representation of the keyboard schemata, with their arguments only loosely bound.
 Second, the nature of the skill requires simultaneous, parallel control of the fingers and hands, and this requires some form of negotiation process to turn the potentially competitive movements into cooperative ones.
 The degrees of freedom problem can be turned into a degrees of freedom virtue Third, the model must incorporate the entire environment within which the typist operates, from the reading of the text, to the cognitive and motor control systems, to the shapes and mechanical characteristics of the hands, finger, and keyboard Indeed, some of the limitations of the current model may really result from limitations of how well we dealt with the environment surrounding the control processes.
 Perhaps the central conclusion to be drawn from our analysis of typing deals with the nature of skilled motor coordination W e propose that the motor control system carries out its computations relatively locally and in parallel.
 W e presume that such a conclusion will be proven for all skills involving high speed performance.
 References Gentner, D.
 R.
, Grudin.
 J.
.
 & Conway.
 E Finger movciwnis in transcription typing.
 San Diego, California: Center for Human Information Processing, University of California, San Diego Technical Report 8001.
 May, 1980.
 Rumelharl, D E , & Norman, D.
 A.
 Simulating a Skilled Typist: A Study of Skilled CognitiveMotor Performance.
 San Diego, California: Center for Human Information Processing.
 University of Calirornia.
 San Diego.
 Technical Report.
 1981.
 282 Toward g Formal Theory of Human Plausible Reasoning Allan Collins Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc.
 Ryszard S.
 Michalski University of Illinois ChampaignUrbana Given that "rel" can be realized in four different forms, this system generates 64 different onestep inferences, and a very large set of twostep inferences.
 Many common human inferences are twostep inferences in the system, as for example the functional analogy described in earlier papers (Collins et al.
, 1975; Collins, 1978a, 1978b).
 We will try to show how a variety of human protocols can be accounted for, given such a system of plausible reasoning.
 The talk will describe our attempts to formulate a theory of human plausible reasoning based on analysis of people's answers to a large number of everyday questions (Collins 1978a, 1978b).
 The formalization generates a large number of plausible inference types from a small set of basic elements.
 The basic elementr, in the theory include: arguments descr iptors references terms statements Vj^, Vj, etc.
 ai, 32, etc.
 c^, C2, etc.
 aj^(vj^) , a2(v2) , etc.
 ^I'^l' = Cj^ : Y mutual dependencies aj^ (vj^)<!L5.
>a2 (V2) between terms mutual dependencies a2^(vj^)=c;^''—>a2(v2)=C2 between statements References Collins, A.
 Fragments of a theory of human plausible reasoning.
 In D.
 L.
 Waltz (Ed.
) Theoretical issues in natural language processing.
 Vol.
 2.
 Champaign, 111.
: University of Illinois, 197Ba.
 Collins, A.
 Human plausible reasoning.
 Cambridge, Mass.
: Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc.
 Report No.
 3810, 1978b.
 Collins, A.
, Warnock, E.
 , Aiello, N.
, & Miller, M.
 Reasoning from incomplete knowledge.
 In D.
 Bobrow & A.
 Collinf.
 (Eds.
) Representation ajvJ understanding.
 New York: Academic Press, 1975.
 Mutual dependencies are bidirectional reflecting people's functional knowledge, as between say the likelihood of a persor having mumps and also having fever.
 Ir these expressions " , 6 , and y ar« certainty parameters: Y reflects th< degree to which a person thinks ; statement is true, " reflects the degre< of certainty about the right hand term it a mutual dependency given that the left hand term is true, and 6 the certainty in the reverse direction.
 There are also four operators that occur in the rules of inference: generalization, specification, similarity, and dissimilarity (which is the negative operator in the system).
 These operators are designated by a "rel" in the rules of inference.
 The inference rules in the system as developed so far include: descriptor transforms and reference transforms on both statements and mutual dependencies, and derivations from relations between arguments and from relations between terms in both statements and mutual dependencies.
 Attribution inferences, which are common in human reasoning, are an elaboration of these basic inference types.
 The system does not yet include the rules for induction of statements and mutual dependencies, nor the various metainferences in the theory (Collins, 1978b) .
 283 Skills, Learning and Parallelism Aaron Sloman, Cognitive Studies Programme, University of Sussex, Brighton, BN1 9 QN, England.
 The distinction between compiled and interpreted programs plays an important role in computer science and may be essential for understanding intelligent systems.
 For instance programs in a highlevel language tend to have a much clearer structure than the machine code compiled equivalent, and are therefore more easily synthesised, debugged and modified.
 Interpreted languages make it unnecessary to have both representations.
 Further, if the interpreter is itself an interpreted program it can be modified during the course of execution, for instance to enhance the semantics of the language it is interpreting.
 (This sort of possibility vitiates many of the arguments in Fodor (1975) which assume that all programs are compiled into a low level machine code, whose interpreter never changes).
 People who learn about the compiled/interpreted distinction frequently reinvent the idea that the development of skills in human beings may be a process in which programs are first synthesised in an interpreted language, then later translated into a compiled form.
 The latter is thought to explain many features of skilled performance, for instance, the speed, the difficulty of monitoring individual steps, the difficulty of interrupting, starting or resuming execution at arbitrary desired locations, the difficulty of modifying a skill, the fact that performance is often unconscious after the skill has been developed, and so on.
 On this model, the olc jokes about centipedes being unable to walk, or birds to fly, if they think about how they do it, might be related to the impossibility of using the original interpreter after a program has been compiled into a lower level language.
 Despite the attractions of this theory ] suspect that a different model is required.
 Ir chapter 8 of Sloman (1975) I drew attention tc familiar facts about children counting which suggest that instead of using a single program interleaving the production of a new numeral and pointing at a new object, they run two processes ii parallel, using a third process to monitor thei and keep them in step, or abort them if they ge too far out of step.
 If children used a single serial program, repeating the steps SAY NEXT NUMBER; POINT AT NEXT OBJECT; within some kind of loop, then it would be impossible to get out of step.
 But they do, and sometimes spontaneously correct themselves.
 Adults performing some tasks requiring two sequences of actions to be synchronised, for instance playing a musical instrument with two hands, may experience similar problems.
 The ability to run a program in parallel with others, using a third process to achieve synchronisation could be a powerful source of new skills.
 For instance, it would not be necessary to write a new program interleaving the steps of two old ones, as is required in conventional programming languages.
 Provided both programs are initially represented in a form which permits synchronisation with messages from other processes, it becomes possible to synthesise a new skill simply by running the two old programs in step.
 It may be necessary to develop new perceptual skills to check whether they are in step or not, but that sort of skill would be required in any case for monitoring a single serial program.
 Similarly, instead of rewriting a program to cope with different stopping conditions, the same program could be executed and interrupted by different external monitors: for instance counting all the buttons, counting out buttons till there's one for each buttonhole, couting out five buttons.
 If programs are to be run in parallel this can be done either by timesharing a single processor, or by using a network of processors which can work in parallel.
 In principle the two are equivalent, though time sharing one processor raises many difficulties if each of the separate processes has its own requirements concerning speed of execution, synchronisation etc.
 Further, there is plenty of evidence that human and animal brains consist of many units which can do things in parallel.
 It is therefore most likely that if processes do run in parallel as suggested above, then they probably run on different processors.
 This immediately suggests the possibility that di/ferent processors may have different computational resources.
 For instance they may vary in speed, or memory capacity.
 More importantly, they may vary in the extent to which they have capability to run programs or the extent to which they have access to mechanisms required for synthesising procedures, monitoring them, debugging them, interrupting and restarting them, relating execution steps to goals and percepts, and so on.
 Thus there might be some processors with all the facilities required for developing programs, and other processors capable only of running the programs.
 If fully developed and tested programs produced by the former are shippped out to the latter processors for execution, then this could produce the kinds of phenomena, mentioned above which suggest to many people that compilation has occurred.
 By contrast, our model does not require a change of representation, merely a change to a different interpreter.
 The first process might develop the general structure of a skill or ability, perhaps leaving some of the fine tuning, adjustment of parameters and thresholds, etc.
, to be done at lower levels while the program is run by a different machine.
 A theory along these lines could explain how many skills (e.
g.
 musical performance) might be learnt by learning various subskills which are subsequently put together.
 The synchronisation of two old skills might involve the development of a new third skill, which will run in parallel with them.
 (Try opening and shutting your mouth and your fist repeatedly in time.
 Then try doing it out of phase.
) More complex skills might involve an extended hierarchy of subprocesses some of which control others.
 Some sort of synchronisation between largely independent processes is in any case required for coordinating visual perception with movement of limbs.
 There are different ways in which synchronisation might be achieved.
 The difficulty of playing a piano piece where the left and right hand use different beats, suggests that sometimes the coordination of two or more lowlevel machines requires synchronisation signals linked to suitable points in the programs.
 Synchronisation could make use of global timing signals, shared between all processes.
 Alternatively, different 284 groups of processes might use their own synchronisation signals.
 (The former would limit the number of different tasks reouiring different rhythmic patterns which could be performed in parallel.
) Further, some kinds of synchronisation might use a sort of variable representation of speed (like a throttle), as is suggested by the coordination of complex dance movements or the hand and foot movements needed to drive a car.
 It is possible that other things besides timing can be coordinated.
 For instance in playing music with two hands, phrasing, stress and volume can be coordinated, and the same piece may be played with different superimposed 'expression', suggesting that there is a supervisory program which controls the way the subprograms are executed.
 So besides timing, it seems that at least amplitudes and smoothness of execution can be externally controlled.
 If complex actions involve many different processes running in parallel, then interrupting and reorganising the processes may be a very complex matter.
 Such disturbances seem to play a role in some emotional states for instance when you lose your balance, or are startled by a face seen suddenly at a window (Sloman 1981).
 There are at least two different ways in which a program might be "shipped out" to a lower level process after being synthesised by a "central" processor.
 The whole program might be copied into the memory of the new processor.
 Alternatively, there might be common access to some memory, with new processors being told to get their instructions from the very same datastructure built by the programsynthesiser.
 The former might be more suitable where there is no shortage of processors or memory space, or where there is a shortage of rapid access communication paths.
 The latter might be appropriate where processors have to be reused for different purposes, and where subsequent modifications to the program, achieved by the higherlevel machine, should be immediately available to the lower levels.
 There are many problems and gaps in this theory sketch, including unknown tradeoffs.
 Is there only one programsynthesising machine, or are there several, allowing more than one new skill to be learnt at a time? (E.
g.
 Learning a new poem at the same time as learning a new scale on the piano? Learning the words of a song at the same time as learning the tune?) Is there a very large number of processors available for executing programs in parallel, or only a small number (e.
g.
 seven plus or minus two?) The former would allow arbitrarily complex hierarchically organised skills to be developed, subject possibly only to the constraint that a single global synchronising 'beat' is to be shared between them all.
 How deep can the parallel process hierarchies get? To what extent is horizontal communication across the hierarchies possible? What happens if the central processor and a lowlevel processor both attempt to run the same program? (Breathing seems to be an example where this might occur, since it is controlled intelligently in speaking, singing, etc.
 in addition to being an 'automatic' process.
) Perhaps the running is always done by a lowerlevel processor, but sometimes under the control of the more intelligent program sythesiser? How are the primitive instructions routed from processors to still lower level processors, e.
g.
 to muscles? If programs are physically copied into the lower level processors, then can processors be reused during the process of development and debugging a skill? Is there some sort of garbage collection of processors? Similar questions arise about the space required for the alternative system where different processors access the same program stored in the same location.
 Can storage space for instructions be reused? How are new processors and new storage space allocated? Do the different processors share limited resources of some kind, e.
g.
 memory or 'fuel', or are they truly independent? Does this hierarchical parallel organisation of "motor" skills also play a role in other abilities, e.
g.
 perception, language understanding, problemsolving? What are the implications of all this for our understanding of consciousness? Is it possible that many of the lower levels use computational resources of types which first evolved in much less intelligent organisms? How did the newer, more sophisticated mechanisms evolve? This is a short list of questions I cannot now answer.
 I don't claim to have offered a theory.
 At best it is a research program which may produce explanatory theories one day.
 References J.
A.
 Fodor, The Language of Thought, Harvester Press, 1975.
 A.
 Sloman, The Computer Revolution in Philosophy; Phi losophy Science and Models of Wind, Harvester Press and Humanities Press, 1978.
 A.
 Sloman, 'Why robots will have emotions', submitted to IJCAI 1981.
 285 Cognitive Style and the Learning of a First Computer Language M.
J.
 Coombs ManComputer Communication Research Group Computer Laboratory University of Liverpool Liverpool, L69 IBX U.
K.
 1.
 Individuc.
 Differences and Computing Skills It is commonly asserted that the learning of computing skills is subject to marked individual differences (e.
g.
 Weinberg, 1971; Gould, 1975; du Boulay and O'Shea, 1901).
 Such differences are of considerable importance for both practical and theoretical reasons.
 First, an analysis of successful and unsuccessful learning strategies should provide data on the nature of computing information and the skills required for its acquisition.
 This infornation would aid in the design of systems for guiding the rapidly increasing, population of computer users who are not computer professionals.
 Secondly, the existence of clear individual differences should provide an ideal environment for exploring the relationships between learning strategy and cognitive performance.
 Research was therefore undertaken with these two objectives in mind, but emphasising the first.
 Work was conducted in two stages: the identification of the main parameters of learning style related to the learning of a first computer language; the definition of interactions between style, strategy and knowledge representation.
 2.
 Stage 1: Four Programming Studies In order to characterize the relationship between learning style and the acquisition of programming skills and to provide early applicable results, research was conducted on science and engineering postgraduate students taking a standard introductory FORTRAN course (Coombs et al.
, 1981).
 A research methodology was used in which subjects were presented with two tasks: a "target task" for the assessment of programming skill, and an "indicator task" for the assessment of learning style.
 The objective was to characterize performance on the target task, about which little was known, with reference to performance on the indicator task.
 It was thus important that the indicator task was wellfounded and had some clearly defined relationship with the target task.
 Two programming tests were devised for the target task, following the finding (Coombs, 1977) that recall of the units of procedural information may be independent of ability to recall the units in their correct order.
 The first test the Statement Test was devised to assess learning of the format and operation of individual FORTRAN structures and required the idoali Cication of appropriate errors in 3 short programs (21 in 56 lines of program).
 The second test the Logic Test was devised to assess ability to assemble individual structures into successful programs.
 Subjects were presented with 3 decks of cards, each comprising a complete program.
 The cards were given in random order and subjects were required to reconstruct the original program.
 Selection of an Indicator task proved difficult because of the poorly understood and unstable relationships between tests of cognitive style.
 A test was therefore used which had significant features in common with the skills assessed by the target tasks.
 A suitable classification of individual differences was found in the Operation Learning/Comprehension Learning distinction proposed by Pask (1975).
 The distinction was founded in a wellelaborated theory Conversation Theory and a test was available the SpyRing History Test.
 Pask's categories are defined witliin two basic dimensions of human information processing: a) the management of data selected from the world (attention); b) the mental representation of that data (mental model building).
 The attention dimension draws the binary distinction between local and global features of a subject material.
 The representation dimension draws the distinction between representation of new information in terms of descriptions and in terms of procedures to be used for its generation from previously acquired information.
 Given interactions between the dimensions, Pask proposes two basic cognitive styles: operation learning, (procedure building using lowlevel, local information); comprehension learning (description building with attention to global features) .
 Students biased towards operation learning are thus able to learn rules, methods and details but are unaware of how and why they fit together.
 Comprehension learners learn an .
overall picture of the subject matter but may not be able to perform the operations to use it.
 Comprehension of the information exists in the absence of rules or operational meaning and in ignorance of details required for the information to be used.
 The procedural aspect of computing provides a conceptual link between cognitive style and the programming tests, it being our contention that learners with an operation bias would have a dual advantage of the Logic Test but no advantage on the Statement Test.
 With the Logic Test, operation learners would be expected to attend during the learning of a laiiguage structure to its internal logic.
 However, comprehension learners would only attempt to remember the global features of the structure, making no close distinction between the essential features and those arising from its illustrative context.
 A comprehension learner would be expected to accept the example as given and always work within the framework until he was presented with a different, example.
 The operation learner would thus have an advantage when faced with the Logic Test, because he would have a clear idea of the essential features of the structure independent of context.
 Structures could therefore be readily assembled, without interference, to complete the problem program.
 The operation learner would also be expected to gain a second advantage by applying an operation strategy to the problem itself.
 The Statement Test would not be expected to be so sensitive to learning style, all errors being contained within individual statements and not being related to the logic of the programs.
 They should therefore be iaentiflabie from incidental learning of the surface features of the language.
 They would not 'look right' to anyone who had been exposed to FORTRAN, irrespective of his understanding of the workings of the language.
 Four programming studies were conducted on different groups of students attending a standard FORTRAN course, the only addition being a request 286 3.
 stage 2: Cognitive Style to Learner Strategy The research reported above focussed on the role of cognitive style in learning.
 However, in order to apply the findings to designing educational and guidance systems for unsuccessful students, one must translate style into strategy.
 Protocol data therefore was collected during the first, third and fourth programming study on subjects' learning activities during the lectures and practlcals.
 In the fourth study a computer based concept elicitation technique was used to record the changing understanding of concepts during the course.
 The protocol studies concentrated on subjects with an extreme operation learning (10) and extreme comprehension learning (8) bias.
 The research has provided a description of two classes of strategic element: those concerned with mental processing and those concerned with learning activities.
 From these two classes it is possible to identify model strategies which are similar to competence models in linguistics.
 In the presence instance our model strategies also have sufficient empirical foundation to provide a basis both for planning further research and guiding instruction.
 Learning to use any symbol system requires the student both to progressively identify acceptable structures and to apply them to some processing objective.
 Moreover, the competent use of a symbol system implies the ability to perceive structures at many different levels (Van Dijk, 1977).
 A symbol system, therefore, has both microstructure and macrostructure.
 Both levels should be born in mind when interpreting our findings.
 Green et al (1981) emphasises the importance of macrostructure for the writing and debugging of programs.
 Operation learners appear to actively use both lecture and practical sessions.
 The former are used for recording facts, the learner ensuring that the lecturer's statements and examples are recorded accurately in full.
 Examples are also recorded carefully, the operation learner's priorities being a) to copy the example, b) to follow the lecturer's analysis of the logical relations between statements, c) to consider alternative methods of achieving the same programming objective.
 In b) and c) the operation learner works from "inside" the code, paying close attention to the logical relations between statements.
 By following these activities, the student leaves the lecture with an accurate and relatively uninterpreted record of the structures discussed and the examples given, and understanding the internal logic of most of the exanples.
 The major learning activity of operation learners takes place during practicals.
 Here they continue to build their knowledge of the functional relations between lowlevel language structures so leading to a knowledge of useful macrostructures.
 This again appears to be achieved from the "inside" by, for example, seeking various combinations of statements which will achieve the same processing objective.
 Operation learners thus build considerable knowledge of the computational possibilities of combinations of statements and rapidly develop a rich sense of macrostructure.
 The computer is itself the instructor, reference only being made to external information such as the principles behind the local implementation of FORTRAN or the design of the local operation system when prompted by a program failure which cannot otherwise be corrected.
 Through the practicals, the operation learner develops an understanding of the logic of program design and skills related to debugging and avoidance of errors.
 Comprehension learners, however, adopt a very different distribution of activity.
 During lectures they attempt to achieve what the operation learner reserves for practical sessions.
 The comprehension learner performs significant "on line" processing and is rarely fully engaged in simply reporting facts and examples.
 He rarely takes verbatim notes, rather recording the abstracted or generalized results of his processing of the lecture material.
 Such processing is, of course, carried out without the aid of the computer.
 Significant structure is therefore determined by reference bo external sources of information from related domains such as FORTRAN design principles or details concerning the local machine.
 Where relevant information is not available, the comprehension learner tends to create determining principles for himself rather than store the lowlevel information in unintegrated form.
 The comprehension learner thus leaves the lecture with represntations of language structures which have been determined to some extent by factors external to FORTRAN and which have never been validated by an actual computer run.
 Moreover, his knowledge of structure does not that students complete the SpyRing History Test early in the course and the prograraning tests at the end.
 A total sample of 42 subjects completed all tasks over a main study and four replications.
 The SpyRing Test yielded for each subject a score of operation, comprehension and incidental learning.
 The Logic Test was scored using a count of simple firstorder transitional errors and the Statement Test was scored using the signaldetection theory measure of P(A).
 Relationships were assessed using Pearson Correlation Coefficients.
 The results for all these studies revealed one stable significant relationship (.
05 level) between the exercise of operation learning and the Logic Test.
 Interpreting this result using Pask's (1975) theory and our own confirmatory factoranalysis of the SpyRing Test, it was concluded that the skill of assembling statements into programs was best acquired by subjects who: paid close attention to details;  systematically abstracted the critical features of programming structures;  represented structural relations in rule form.
 Evidence of the relationship between cognitive style and the Statement Test was inconclusive, although contrary to our hypothesis there appeared to be a weak relationship with operation learning.
 From results at this stage it was possible to make 4 assertions concerning the learning of FORTRAN: 1) One can define at least 2 different learning styles in a population of novice computer users.
 2) Those exhibiting significant operation learning are more successful at assembling language structures into an effective algorithm.
 3) The successful learning style is defined by close attention to detail and a preference for procedural representation.
 4) Successful identification of individual language structures is independent of learning style.
 287 develop beyond this point because he also fails to take advantage of practicals to conduct validation.
 The comprehension learner thus leaves a course with a descriptive knowledge of individual, lowlevel structures but no reliable, tested knowledge of raacrostructure.
 5.
 Some Final Remarks The above accounts suggest that all students should be encouraged to use an operational strategy.
 However, Pask (1976) proposes that comprehension learners should be left with their natural style but with: accurate conceptual and supporting information; encouragement to solve problems in a structured environment.
 It may be argued that the unique characteristics of FORTRAN and the specific nature of the Liverpool course make general proposals premature.
 Whilst accepting this possibility, we believe that the effects of operation and comprehension styles are sufficiently universal that similar differences will be found with other languages and computing situations.
 Although differences in detail may exist, we propose that whilst programming requires precise specification of code, and whilst languages fail to make raacrostructure perceptually evident and are implemented on machines not easily modelled by the novice, similar effects will be found.
 6.
 References COOMBS, M.
J.
 (1977).
 Modality and order recall in learning from television, with reference to teaching medical procedures.
 Ph.
D.
 Thesis, University of Liverpool.
 COOMBS, M.
J.
, GIBSON, R.
 and ALTY, J.
L.
 (1981).
 Acquiring a first computer language: a study of individual differences.
 In M.
J.
 Coombs 1 J.
L.
 Alty (eds), Computing Skills and the User Interface.
 London: Academic Press.
 DU BOULAY, B.
 & O'SHEA, T.
 (1981).
 Teaching novices programming.
 In M.
J.
 COOMBS s J.
L.
 ALTY (eds), Computing Skills and the User Interface• London: Academic Press.
 GOULD, J.
D.
 (1975).
 Some psychological evidence on how people debug computer programs.
 International Journal of ManMachine Studies, 7, 151182.
 GREEN, T.
R.
G.
, SIME, M.
E.
 & FITTER, M.
J.
 (1981).
 The art of notation.
 In M.
J.
 COOMBS & J.
L.
 ALTY (eds), Computing Skills and the User Interface.
 London: Academic Press.
 PASK, G.
 (1975).
 Conversation, Cognition and Learning.
 Amsterdam: Elsevier.
 PASK, G.
 (1976).
 Conversation Theory : Applications in Education and Epistemology.
 Amsterdam: Elsevier.
 VAN DIJK, T.
A.
 (1977).
 Semantic macrostructures and knowledge frames in discourse comprehension.
 In M.
A.
 JUST S P.
A.
 CARPEr/TER (eds).
 Cognitive Processes in Congrehension.
 New York: Wiley.
 WEINBERG, G.
M.
 (1971).
 The Psychology of Computer Programming.
 New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
 288 THE CONCEPT OF EHACHINE: ON BRAIN HARDWARE AND THE ALGORITHMS OF THINKING Victor Eliashberg Varian Associates, Palo Alto The goal of this paper is to call in question the popular thesis that the problem of the algorithms performed by the brain (algorithms of thinking) has but little to do with the problem of brain hardware.
 The paper presents a simple example of a "brainlike" universal associative processor (referred to as Emachine) for which such a thesis would be obviously inadequate.
 More sopliisticated examples of Emachines were studied in Eliashberg (1979).
 1.
 A SIMPLE EXAMPLE OF EMACHINE Consider the "neural" network schematically shown in Fig.
 1.
 The big circles with incoming and outgoing lines represent centers, elements which are assigned certain discrete coordinates in the network.
 The small circles denote couplings, elements whose place in the network is determined by a pair of coordinates of centers.
 A center may be viewed as a neuron with its dendrites and axon or a neural subsystem that may be treated as a "reduced neuron" A coupling may be interpreted as a synapse or a "reduced synapse", the white and the black circles corresponding to the excitatory and inhibitory synapses respectively.
 Using the terminology of Nauta and Feirtag (1979), the network of Fig.
 1 may be characterized as a threeneuron nervous system (it has three neurons in a path between its input and output).
 Some simple animals have two and even oneneuron nervous systems, so the network of Fig.
 1 may be viewed as a morphological model corresponding to a rather advanced stage of the evolution of the brain.
 Accordingly, one may expect to get some interesting information processing characteristics in a neurobiologically reasonable functional model of this network.
 Tlierefore to reach the goal of this paper it seems sufficient to show why the traditional brainhardwareindependent approach to the problem of the algorithms of thinking would fail to adequately describe the psychological properties of an animal with such a simple nervous system.
 So much the more may this approach be inadequate in the case of human brain.
 NOTATION.
 Nj(i) is the ith center from the set N.
.
 S^(i,i') is the (i,i')th coupling from the set ^kj • V is discrete time (the number of cycle).
 x(",v) is the input vector of the model.
 (The dot substituted for an index implies that the whole set of components corresponding to this index is assumed).
 G''(",i) is the vector of gains of couplings S2i(i,').
 This vector will be interpretea as the symbol stored in the ith location of input longterm memory (ILTM) of the model.
 E(i,v) is a variable describing a hypothetical state of "residual excitation" (Estate) associated with center N2(i).
 Such a state might be interpreted as a certain phenomenological counterpart of the concentration of a chemical participating in a slow reversible reaction.
 Accordingly, in d more sophisticated mcwiel one may introduce several types of Lstates.
 Sucli states will be viewed as the states of distributed "nonsymbolic" shortterm memory of the model.
 U„(i,v) is the (postsynaptic) potential of center N2(i).
 J^U,^) is the output signal of N2(i).
 Gy{",i) is the vector of gains of couplings ^32^'^^ interpreted as the symbol stored in the ith location of output longterm memory (OLTM) of the model.
 For the sake of simplicity we will assume that the state of longterm memory (ILTM and OLTM) is formed before the first moment of observation and doesn't change later, i.
e.
 we will avoid the problem of learning.
 y(',v) is the output vector of the model.
 In a rather general form a functional model of the network of Fig.
 1 with the above input, state, and output variables may be described as the following machine.
 y(,v)  Fy(x(,v),E(,v), G"C,)) E(,V+1) •« Fg(x(,V),E(,V), G"(,)), where Fy is the otput procedure, Fg is the next Estate procedure, G"=G'',Gy.
 As it was mentioned above in this paper we are not concerned with the next Gstate procedure and treat the variable G"(',') as a parameter.
 For the goal of this paper it is sufficient to make rather simple assumptions about F and Fg.
 What is important for this goal is the presence of Estates rather than the details of their interaction with the input vector and the Gstate and the details of their dynamics.
 With that in mind let us introduce the following "quasineural" description of F and Fg.
 (The reader with an appropriate background will be able to find many other descriptions of these procedures satisfying the requirements of this paper).
 OUTPUT PROCEDURE, F : The potential U2(i,v) is the following function of x(',v),E(i,v) and G'^(,i) (1) Ujd.
v) S(i,v)[1 + aE(i,v)], where (2) S(i,v) I G''(j,i).
x(j,v) , i=l,.
.
.
no (J) The layer of centers N„ with lateral inhibitory couplings S22 performs the random equally pro bable choice of a center, Njdg) , from the subset of centers with the maximum potential (Eliashberg, 1969, 1979).
 It is assumed that there is some noise.
 (3) J^(i '•»>'{; ;l'"°  , 2^ ' L 0 , where (4) î re M(V)= {i/U2(i, )=max,^,U2(i,v) > O} We are using ALGOLlike notation,:^ .
to denote the operator of random equally probable choice of an element from a set.
 The output vector is determined as follows (5) y(,V) r Gy(,i).
72(i,v) (i) NEXT ESTATE PROCEDURE , F : ' e The dynamics of Estate is described by the first order difference equation, the time constant, T(i), of this equation depending on whether E(i,v) increases, t(i)=T''', or decreases, T(i)=T 289 (6) T(i)[E(i,v)E(i,v)] = S(i,v)E(i,v) , where (7) T(i) ^f"^ ^^ S(i,v)>E(i,v) In what follows the system described by Exps (1)  (7) will be referred to as Model 1.
 2.
 SOME GENERAL INFORMATION PROCESSING CHARACTERISTICS OF MODEL 1 2.
1.
 Universality with respect to the Class of Combinatorial Machines Let x(,V),G>^(,i)€ X, where X is a finite set of positive normalized vectors.
 Let y(,V), Gy(,v)« Y, where Y is a finite set of positive vectors.
 Let the number of locations of LTM be as big as required (n2>^"'), so any desired software , G^( ,),G^(.
 ,  ) , may be put into the LTM of Model 1 before the beginning of observation.
 Let o= 0 (the mechanism of STM of Model 1 is "turned off").
 It can be shown that in this case Model 1 can be programmed to simulate an arbitrary probabilistic combinatorial machine (with rational probabilities) with the input alphabet X and the output alphabet Y.
 2.
2.
 Universality with respect to the Class of FiniteState Machines Let us split the input and output vectors of Model 1 each into two subvectors x(,v) = (xj^(,v),x2( • ,v)), y(',v) (yji(".
v), y(,v)), and let us introduce the delayed feedback X2(*,v+1) y2(*>v).
 Let xi(,v)e X, X2(,v),y2(,v)€ 0, y^{,v)(: Y, where X and Q are finite sets of positive normalized vectors, Y is a finite set of positive vectors.
 Let as before a=0.
 It can be verified that this modification of Model 1 can be programmed to simulate any probabilistic finite state machine (with rational probabilities) with input alphabet X, state set Q, and output alphabet Y.
 2.
3.
 EStates as the Mechatiism of Mental Set Let a>0 (the mechanism of STM of Model 1 is "turned on").
 Let us assume at first that the time constants are very big (t'*'*"', t*• «> ) so the Estate of Model 1 does not change considerably during the interval of observation.
 Let other conditions be as in section 2.
1.
 Suppose the LTM of Model 1 contains all possible input/output pairs (associations) from X x Y , i.
e.
, for all (a,b)6 Xxy there exists ie {l,.
.
n2y such that G''(,i)=a and Gy(,i)=b .
 It can be shown that for any (deterministic) combinatorial machine with the input alphabet X and the output alphabet Y there exists an initial Estate, E(,0), of Model 1 such that this model in this state simulates the above machine.
 Thus being observed as a black box.
 Model 1 with a fixed state of its LTM may appear to an experimenter as any of m^ deterministic combinatorial machines (1=|X|, m=|Yl) depending on the "state of mind" ("mental state"), E( •,•>>), of this model.
 This result can be naturally extended to the class of (deterministic) finitestate machines in the case of the Model 1 with the feedback of section 2.
1.
 Let us remove the condition of infinite time constants but still assume that these constants are rather big.
 In this case the Estate of Model 1 will change slowly ("adiabatically") so this model will gradually change into different combinatorial machines.
 Thus the "nonsymbolic" expressions (6),(7),determined at a hardware level, controll the "personality" of Model 1 as a symbolic machine.
 2.
4.
 Why Model 1 Jeopardizes a BrainHardwareIndependent Approach to the Problem of the Algorithms of Thinking Imagine a researcher trying to develop a theory of the behavior of Model 1 per se (Model 1 treated as a black box) without being concerned with the hardware phenomena in this model.
 Let us assume that the researcher is used to work with a hardwareindependent higher level language, say LISP, and deal with traditional symbol manipulation concepts.
 It is very likely that Model 1 would fool such a researcher by pretending to behave as a "classical" symbolic machine.
 The researcher with the above mentioned methodological mental set and the knowledge base associated with the "classical" symbolic information processing paradigm would have little chance to think about the "nonsymbolic"' Estates of Model 1, much less to find the hardware expressions (6),(7) describing the transformations of these states.
 It is not difficult to imagine how a sophisticated chemistry of the brain (see, e.
g.
, Iversen, 1979, Kandel, 1979) may lead to nonsymbolic brain hardware expressions much more complex than Exps (6),(7).
 Thus the above mentioned researcher would hardly have a better chance to come up with an adequate theory of human mental states than he (she) does in the case of Model 1.
 3.
 METHODOLOGICAL REMARKS 3.
1.
 On the Whole Brain and the Parts of its Behavior Let (A,So) be a hypothetical machine corresponding to the human brain.
 A, in its initial (roughly newborn) state, Sq After several years of learning (A,So) is changed into an intelligent system (A,Sj^).
 Model 1 and the more sophisticated examples of Emachines studied in the Eliashberg (1979) manuscript give reasons to believe in the following methodological thesis.
 There may exist a relatively simple description of (A,Sq) in terms of a machine with the state set similar to that of the brain.
 There may be a good possibility to find this description by trying to answer in a single context a large enough set of specially selected basic neurobiological and psychological questions.
 At the same time it may be hopeless a strategy to try to find adequate descriptions of some nontrivial "parts" of the behavior of (A,Sn) without looking for a description of the "whole" system (A.
Sq).
 3.
2.
 On the General Relation between the Theory of the Brain and the Information Processing Psychology To clearly understand the implied methodological meaning of the above mentioned thesis it is useful to compare the general relation between (A,So) and the information processing psychology with the general relation between the basic equations of a traditional physical theory and this theory.
 As an example of the latter relation let us take the Maxwell equations and the classical electrodynamics.
 (Don't take this metaphor too literally!).
 The relatively simple Maxwell equations allow one to describe all variety of arbitrary complex classical electromagnetic phenomena as a result of interaction of these equations with the correspon290 ding variety of "external worlds" represented in the form of various boundary conditions, media, and sources.
 To find the Maxwell equations did not mean to solve all the problems of classical electrodynamics, the latter having developed (and continuing to do so) a number of specific pmlilpmoriented models and concepts.
 It would hardly be possible, however, to adequately formulate all these specific problems, let alone solve them, without the Maxwell equations.
 3,3.
 On Skipping "Simple" Problems in order to Solve Complex Ones Faster For the goal of this paper it is especially important to emphasize that the Maxwell equations were found in an attempt to adequately formalize and extrapolate some "simple" basic knowledge about electromagnetic phenomena (Faradey law,etc.
).
 This formalization and extrapolation created a powerful mathematical tool allowing to adequately approach complex problems of classical electrodynamics.
 Imagine a physicist trying to develop a computer program for simulating the behavior of electromagnetic field in a complex microwave device without being concerned with the equations describing the fundamental properties of this field.
 A researcher trying to skip "simple" basic neurobiological and psychological questions, in order to solve complex problems of human information processing faster, may well be in a situation similar to that of such a physicist.
 Nl io  o S2i(i,)gX( i) .
 .
 .
 u U — "l x(,\)) =(i,v:JP^(i,v) ( > „ < c r .
 ^ ILTM 7Vy J2^i'^'  ̂ jl > OLTH !i>Gy(,i) ' / / / ^ 3 2 S32(,i) Writing into OiA'M Fig.
 1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I want to express my gratitude to Prof.
 H.
 Landahl, Prof.
 J.
 McCarthy, Prof.
 H.
 Martinez, Prof.
 I.
 Sobel, Prof.
 L.
 Stark, and Prof.
 L.
 Zadeh for ur.
pfuJ comments.
 REFEPFilCES Eliashbeig, V.
M.
 On a class of learning machines.
 Leningrad, USSR, Proc.
 of VNIIB, 54, 1961 (in Russian).
 Eliashberg, V.
 The Concept of Emachine and the Problem of ContextDependent Behavior.
 Palo Alto, Ca.
, 1979, Copyright 1980, by V.
 Eliashberg, TXu 40320, US Copyright Off.
 Iversen, L.
L.
 The chemistry of the brain.
 Sc.
 American, Sept.
 1979.
 Kandel, E.
R.
 Small systems of neurons.
 Sc.
 American, Sept.
 1979.
 Nauta, W.
 6 Feirtag, M.
 The organization of the brain.
 Sc.
 American, Sept.
 1979.
 291 Invariance Hierarchies in Metaphor Interpretation Jaime G.
 Carbonell Carnegie Mellon University Pitlsburgh, PA 15213 Abstract Interpreting metaptiors is an integral and inescapable process in human understanding of natural language.
 The current investigation analyzes analogical mappings underlying metaphors and their implications for inference and memory organization.
 Regularities have been observed indicating that certain types of conceptual relations are much more apt to remain invariant in analogical mappings than other relations, resulting in an induced invariance hierarchy.
 The centra! thesis is that human inference processes are governed by the same analogical mappings manifest as metaphors in language.
 1.
 Introduction fvletaphor is a pervasive phenomenon in almost all human written and spoken language [7,9.
6] Recently, I proposed a model of metaphor comprehension based on the identification of general metaphor mappings and subsequent recognition o( metaphors as instances of previously encountered generalized mappings [3).
 This method was meant to be a computationallyeffective means of interpreting "common" or "mundane" metaphors As such, it did not address issues of how the underlying analogical mappings structure inference processes; nor did it consider the more difficult task of understanding truly novel metaphors Here, I investigate the inference processes underlying novelmetaphor comprehension and their implications for memory organization.
 Recognition and initial interpretation of metaphors in written or spoken language represents only the tip of the proverbial iceberg.
 fvletaphors in narratives, dialogs and informative text are the observable linguistic manifestations of a central, underlying cognitive process My thesis is that cognition is dominated by analogical reasoning (4), in contrast to more rigid reasoning models based on "sounder" principles of formal logic (eg.
, deduction, resolution, etc.
).
 tvletaphor is the reflection, on the language medium, of analogical thought processes; as such It provides essential clues of the inner functioning ol h u m a n inference processes This paper discusses the utility ol metaphor as a tool to investigate various cognitive processes.
 2.
 Two Metaphors are Better Than One Consider the metaphor inllation is war.
 as discussed by Lakoff.
 Newscasters talk of "lighting inllation", "workers taking a beating from inflation", "Carter loosing another round to inllation'', "inflation overrunning our economy", "savings being attacked by inflation", etc Of what possible use is this metaphor to the reader (or the writer)? Inflation is an economic p h e n o m e n o n w h o s e causes, implications, and methods of control are not understood by the public at large (Indeed, s o m e would say that inflation is poorly understood by politicians, economists and business m e n alike.
) Therefore, the metaphor helps to enrich the knowledge brought to bear in the comprehension process by transfering corresponding appropriate information from the more familiar adversaryconflict situation.
 The necessity to enrich and This lesc.
ltch v.
Ofi sponsorpd in pait by the OHiCP o( N.
iv.
il npsparch (ONf*) iirxJer giant numb<?f MCXWM 79 C0CG1.
 and in p.
irt by Iho OrlRn.
f* AfJv.
jnced Rpsnafch Projects A'lrncy (OOO).
 Outer tJo 3597, mnrntoicd by ttie Air Force Avionics L.
lboiatoiy iiihI<'i Contnct F33G15 70 C l̂ ") 1 Tiie views and conrliifiions conl.
atn'd in tins i)ociinvnt aie Itin, f {;! tt»> .
mlttoi.
 aiu) r.
hoiild not lie int'.
rpr'M''it .
'»M''pnr.
'nt»nn ttio olticiat pclici*̂ '.
 cillioi ĉ piP'.
'.
fO ot iinpliQd.
 nt Hie t̂ 'lenne Adv,inr.
r»J (>„,,iir.
li Pioi'rts A,|"n{.
y nr ttie U S Go'>»'ii\ti,enl The popular ad.
ng'' Ili.
nt inll.
ilion is "Too mucti money ctiasmq loo (e* goods" is itS'K a inel.
ll̂ tior.
 one tliat f.
iifj(j''Sls dillefeni collective action elaborate upon concepts in the understanding process has been amply demonstrated by Bransford and Johnson (2), Anderson [1] and others.
 The only feasible way to bring knowledge to bear on an illunderstood domain is to construct a metaphor suggesting a useful transfer mapping of factual information and inference rules from a belterunderstood domain.
 Given the general notion that metaphors transfer knowledge from well understood to more ill structured domains, three questions arise: 1.
 How can the transfered knowledge be used? (i.
e.
, what does the metaphor provide that a literal description m a y lack?) 2.
 H o w does the transfer of knowledge actually take place? (i.
e.
, what would constitute a computationally viable mechanism?) 3 What implications does the utility and pervasiveness of metaphor have on cognitive processes such as memory organization, inference, and learning? We consider each question in turn.
 3.
 Why Metaphor? The knowledge transfered from a richer domain to a more impoverished one via an analogical mapping, triggered by the use of linguistic metnphor, plays a key role in inference processes.
 Let us return to the Inllation is W n r metaphor II a newspaper article opens with this metaphor, the entire text can be organized around it.
 Equating inflation with a personified "enemy" enables one to draw upon the knowledge organized under "adversary conflict" to suggest courses ot action (in terms of the organizing metaphor)^.
 For instance, w e can n o w understand that in order to "vanquish inflation", w e clearly must: "formulate a battle.
plan", "marshal our forces", "lake the initiative", "go on Ihe ollcnsive", and "make a determined nttnck on infl.
ilion" in order to "stamp it out of our society" and remain on the alert for "future bouf.
'; with inflation.
 In short, w e must "whip inllation novi (WIN)" as President Ford said w h e n he "launched his campaign against inflation" W h e n the metaphor has been drawn, it is reasonably easy to formulnle subgoals based on the belter understood source domain.
 This is the first step in planning purposive behavior.
 The inferences one can draw on how to deal with inflation are all structured by the initial metaphor.
 Different metaphors will yield markedly dillerent sets of inferences.
 In order to illustrate that there is nothing inherently special about the inllntion is w a r metaphor, consider another metaphor used to discuss inflation, encountered frequently in the Spanish press, but easily understood once stated: Inflation is a disease.
 Here, the economy is the patient, inllation is the infecting organism that must be driven out ol the patient with Ihe help of the physician (the economist w h o sets national economic policy).
'' Hence, one can "take the pulse of the economy", "diagnose the cause (always placing the blame on external forces just as disease organisms are an external cause of illness)", "prescribe Ireatment", "put the economy on a fean diet", "make the medicine palatable to the poor", "wait for private enterprise to recuperate", "perform radical surgery, cutting swollen budgets", "treat the symptoms while the inflation continues to ravage", and "relieve the pain by subsidizing the price of necessities" This (eatirntion is due to L atoff One can imagine tliis author's contusion upon reading in a Spanish newspaper about the "national malady", the proposal to "inoculate woit̂ efS" by cost ol living adiuslincnis.
 and a "ptescription lor the national health" What sort ol epidemic was on Ihe loose'' However, once Ihe melaplior was understood, the lexl made perlecl sense Since this metaphor is tlie way in which inlLition rs always discussed.
 Iheie appeared to be no need to introduce it ewplicilly Moreover, no one would ,admit that inllation was not a disease, as Ihe metaphor so deeply pet mealed discussions ol inllation lliat metaphorical terms wi'ie not lecognl^ed as such In a conveisatinn with local peison.
 Ihe lollowinq statement was made in reaction to my sl.
itement sitgqestinq inllation was hcmg dr,cussed in terms ol a medical mel.
aptior "01 roune.
 our economy is sick and iinr,1 he cured, literally! I mean just Ahat I said " This episode stiould help us strp out̂ .
nle our own metaphor anrJ te;\li7e tint no r)nr̂  can literally Liallle inllatmn, bul Ihnt Ihe niiliplior is so inrii,'iinrd in our lliiiihnri Ili.
il we ran draw inteieiices and m.
ile sl.
llements easily on'v il we rr'ly on the ,accr>pli;il nirtriphoi to .
liurliire oui reasoning processes 292 The moral that can tje drawn from these two examples is twofold: 1.
 Inference and planning are directly structured by the analogical mapping underlying a dominating metaphor.
 The first inflation metaphor suggested laciics against inflation, whereas Ihe second suggested cures lor inflation Therefore, the inference mechanism consists ol mapping corresponding solutions from Ihe source to the target domains.
 Hence, the metaphor must equate two problems, one ol which is bellor understood and therefore suggests inferences and plans presumed applicable in solving the second problem.
 (See [4] lor a detailed discussion ol analogical problem solving ) 2.
 Solutions to problems generated by metaphors are O N L Y useful as heuristic problemsolving advice.
 No detailed solutions in wnr or curing discnse can be applied directly to inllation.
 H o w would one "shoot bullets at inllation" or "get inflation to sign the Geneva convention"? Similarly, one cannot "intern the economy in a hospital" or "give it an intravenous penicillin injection" Clearly, the underlying analogy does not extend to the object level.
 However, the planning level provides useful information.
 Therefore the intentions of the actors are preserved in the mapping, as is the causal structure of the events, but the instantiations of the events themselves are lost in the analogy.
 This observation accords with Winston's analogy mappings based on preservation of causal structure (12) and Centner's discussion ol analogy in scientific theory [5].
 4.
 How Metaphors Structure Inference Processes As we discussed in the preceding section, metaphors can establish an expectation setting for comprehending large portions ol text.
 This expectation setting is generated by transfering inferences from the source to Ihe target domain, including the goals and plans that actors in the target domain are expected to pursue (It is important to realize that Ihe goals of "defeating" or "curing" inflation come from the respective metaphors •• not from the concept of inflation itself.
 Therefore a language understanding system must tap the metaphor to comprehend exactly what problems are caused by inflation, and what their respective solution strategies ought to be.
) Let us define creative metaphors to be the linguistic realizations ol large scale analogical mappings that can structure entire planning episodes Creative metaphors include the two inflation examples above.
 Centner's scientific theory metaphors (5), and each of the roughly 50 generalized metaphors discussed in [3].
 Non creative metaphors are frozen metaphor instances with fixed meanings, or figures ol speech (such as "kick the bucket") whose metaphorical roots can only be traced through their etymology.
 Non creative metaphors do not m a p inferences, as their source domain has been lost in their history, and therefore is not available to the understander.
 In short, il a metaphor enables one to bring knowledge to bear from an existing domain to a new, less understood domain, w e deline it as a creative metaphor.
 The discussion below centers on the process that brings knowledge to bear in understanding new domains.
 In order extract information from an existing domain to a new domain via a metaphor, it is crucial to know what aspects ol the existing domain should remain invariant in the mapping, which should be lianslornied, and which should be ignored.
 As w e saw in the previous section, objects are seldom, il ever, preserved in a mel.
iphorical mapping, whereas planning structures are mapped invariant to the new domain in fact il is precisely because planning structure and inlcrences can be preserved by analogical mappings that metaphors aro powerful m(;rins of hefping an undci'itandor formulate renson:ible behavior in uncharted domains.
 An analysis of some two hundred creative metaphors yields the following empirical observation There is a well defined invariance hiorarcliy among the aspects ol a situation that are mapped by a metaphor.
 This perceived regularity is remarkably consistent across metaphors in clillerent domains In fact, metaphors that are rated as "bad metaphors" olten violate the invanance hierarchy presented below.
 Hence, a plausible hypothesis is in that people expect certain aspects of the source domain to remain invariant and other aspects to be coerced into corresponding entities in the new domain These expectations can focus the search for metaphor interpretations.
 The regularities observed over a large number ol metaphors are summarized by the normative invariance hierarchy presented tielow The conceptual relations in the hierarchy are listed in decreasing order of expected invariance: • A goal expectation setting lor the animate actors involved (il any).
 Goals, il present in the source domain, are almost always mapped invariant into corresponding entities in the , target domain If the source domain contains animate actors and the target does not, then the goals ol the actors will be attributed to the corresponding personified entities in the target domain E.
g.
, inflation becomes an anthropomorphized mafevolent agent in inllation is war, therefore the (he goals or a nation at war are mapped invariant in that inflation must be lought and delealed.
 • Planning and counterplanning strategies among competing or cooperating actors.
 These strategies, almost always preserved intact by an analogy, provide a priority ordering among the goals and suggests possible means for pursuing each goal.
 Ollen, the most useful aspect of a metaphor is to enable purposive planning in what previously was too illstructured a domain.
 • Causal Structures •• When the causal structure ol the source domain is explicit, it will typically be preserved by the mapping.
 E.
g.
, medicine cures disease: therefore economic measures will "cure" inllation.
 In Reddy's conduit metaphor for how people talk ol language [9], causal structure abounds.
 E.
g.
, a blocked conduit prevents physical transfer: therelore press censorship will also block dissemination of ideas.
 • Functional Attributes.
 •• The function to which an object in Ihe source domain is typically applied will often be coerced onto an analogous function for the corresponding object in the target domain.
 • Temporal Orderings.
 Normative planning sequences in Ihe source domain map into potentially applicable planning sequences (instantiated dilferently) in the target domain, olten preserving temporal relations.
 * Natural tendencies.
 • In the celebrated analogy between electric circuits and and hydraulic systems (used to explain Ohm's Law), water "tends" to go down hill, therefore electricity "tends" to go towards the voltage "drop" Moreover, thin pipes resist the flow of water, therelore thin wires "resist" the "How" of electricity.
 » Social rolfs.
 •• Social relations are sometimes preserved and sometimes not.
 In a battle there are generals and lootsoldiers; therelore, the war against inllation must be lought by many wageearners (soldiers) under the direction ol economic planners (generals).
 Since doctors cure the disease directly, the economic planner must shoulder the entire burden, and wage earners (patients) are essentially powerless with respect to taking an active role in the cure Both mappings preserve the inferences associated with the social roles in the source domain.
 However, the more specilic roles of "spy" and "submarine commander", are not preserved by the inllation is war metaphor.
 • Structural relations.
 •• Occasionally structural relations remain invariant in an analogy, but olten they are transformed or suppressed For instance, in the Rutherford solar system model ol the atom, physical relations between the electrons (planets) and nucleus (sun) are remain invariant.
 (In both case there ts an orbit relation as a lunction ol an inverse square centripetal force).
 However, Saying "John is at the head of his class " does not preserve the physical structure normally found between a body and a head (the latter being connected to and nourished by the lormer).
 » Descriptive Properties.
 These are the least likely properties to be preserved in a metaphor Wires and pipes are both long and narrow (in the hydraulics metaphor) However, Generals This ob'f̂ ivalion is b.
isod on (l,il.
i coll.
xl'̂ d by LaVolf.
 CiGnlnnr, Oftony ,ind olli»'is Electricity IS ,ictually not a flow of pirciions.
 bul we always think ol it that way br̂ caiise ihe hydiautics meIapl>or peivades our discussions ol electrical phfnomena 293 are military m e n , economic planners are usually academics.
 The sun is yelloworange, very large and has sunspols, but as Gentner points out, none ol these monadic descriptors apply to the nucleus of the Rutherford atom.
 • Ob;ecf identity Objects in the source domain are almost never m a p p e d onto objects of identical type in the target domain Therefore, there are no tanks, bullets, fvtlS's, attack submarines, uniforms, or field hospitals in the battle against inflation.
 5.
 Analogical Mappings in Problem Solving Our discussion suggests that metaphors are a useful means of indexing mappings between goals, planning structures, causal connections, tendencies, relations, and descriptions (in decreasing order of invariance and significance).
 Not all components are present in every metaphor.
 The preferredinvariance ordering helps us understand how metaphors may be used to facilitate reasoning processes in new domains, namely:' 1 Establish the invariant components of the mapping 2.
 Establish initial correspondences among the entities in the source and target domains.
 (This is a very partial correspondence •• only entiliPS that are referenced by an invariant component in the explicit mapping can be directly related ) 3 Goal correspondence identifies the problems that must be solved in the target domain (What should one do about inflation' The disease metaphor metaphor slates that It should be eradicated.
 The war metaphor suggests subjugating it A comparison ol inflation with an overindulging gourni.
md would yield the goal of trimming it down and controling its scope, but not eliminating it) Therefore, metaphor actually determines the goals that one ought to pursue in the target domain.
 Without knowledge of goals lillle purposive action can take place (i e, problem solving becomes meaningless, as there are no goal states in the problem space.
) 4 Planning strategies invariant under a metaphorical mapping transfer operators from the source to the target domain, hence establishing a problem space (8) and suggesting potentially troublesome interactions among operator preconditions.
 The inflation is a disease metaphor suggests that since administering medicine is a useful operator in the medical domain, a correlate operator ought to be useful in the economic domain (vioreover.
 medicine is usually an unpleasant experience, therefore the inference is made that its economic correlate would be unpleasant as well Hence, we speak of giving the economy a strong dose of anti inflationary monetary restraints, and making the policy palatable to workers.
 ^"'l 5 Causal connections classify operators in the target domain by the differences they reduce (analogized from the source domain) "The pressure of the water is determined by the product of the rate ol flow and the cross section of the pipe" suggests that in order to know the voltage, one can measure the current and resistance.
 Therefore a way of reducing the K N O W  V goal is to apply the multiply(l, R) oper.
itor, reducing the K N O W V goal to the subgoals K N O W  R and K N O W I .
 6 Natural tendencies, social roles and structural relations provide information about the applicability conditions of operators (E g.
.
 who can administer medicine (decide economic policy)?), and provide heuristic guidance to pinnning processes in the new domain [E g , Wars are costly and people must make personal sacrilicris; therefore In batliing inflation the cost should be taken into account, and the planner should be ware ol potenlini problems caused by those who are unwillingly called upon to make the sacrifices] 7.
 Temporal progressions stiggesl macro operators (typically uselul seguences ol operators) In treating a disease w e first must identify the cause, then prescribe medicine then wait patiently lor it to take cllecl In war we marshal our forces (no searching for a suitable the enemy is needed, as the enemy is llf.
'io I ,ldopl NnwPlI ,'jn»l Simon's Mf'ans Cnds AnjlyGiS (nnvwoik Inr prolilcm r,olviog [8) Thr̂  fc.
ifler I', rfloircd lo \A] lor a Miotp drl.
nil'Tl tli.
ru'.
'.
ion of ,in.
lIo')p' il prnlji'.
rn f̂ nlving k n o w n at the start ol hostilities), then attack (no waiting tor the attack to take effect is necessary).
 Therefore w e see two very dilfercnl general plans suggested by the two metaphors.
 However, recall that the metaphors shared the s a m e general goal.
 It is typically the case that most metaphors used to explain a particular ill dclined situation will share c o m m o n goals and diverge increasingly as one traverses d o w n the invariance hierarchy.
 Reiterating the central theme ol this section: metaphors provide a problem space, including a goal state, operators Indexed by dillcrences they m a y reduce, and normative plans that m a y prove useful.
 In essence, they m a k e problem solving possible in what m a y previously have been too ill structured a situation to m a k e any progress l\/letaphors do nof, however, provide any c a n n e d solutions applicable directly to n e w problems such vuould be an unreasonable expectation.
 6.
 Exploiting the Invariance Hierarchy The invariance hierarchy provides a firstpass solution lo an apparently simple phenomenon that had perplexed some investigators, including this writer.
 When we hear that "John is a fox" we interpret it to mean "John Is sly", not "John has pointed ears and a bushy tail " Similarly, we interpret "John is a pig" as a remark on his personal habits or his obesity, rather than a statement that John lives in a farm and has a curly tail.
 A partial answer to this problem lies in knowing the most salient feature of the animal to w h o m a person is compared.
 However, a more complete answer is provided by exploiting the invariance hierarchy in the following manner; Consider the animal (source domain) and scan d o w n the hierarchy slopping at the first entry lor which w e have a commonly k n o w n fact.
 For foxes w e stop at planning/counterplanning • folk wisdom tells us that foxes are very adept at devious counterplanning behavior.
 Hence, w e never reach the physical descriptors of a fox.
 For pigs w e m a y stop at either "natural tendency" (if w e believe that pigs tend to get fat) or at "social role"  folk wisdom asserts that pigs play a distinct role in the animal kingdom as the least hygienical of all animals.
 If w e heard "John is a Giraffe", w e find no c o m m o n knowledge anywhere in the hierarchy until w e reach physical attributes.
 Here w e pick the most salient ones (eg.
, height and/or length of neck), to understand the metaphor.
 The key to the process is that comparisons along the higher invariance entries in the hierarchy are preferred O n c e a high invariant property is lound, no lower ones are considered.
 This is crucial to understand "John is an elephant" as a remark on the length of his m e m o r y (or his capacity for work), not the length of his nose (trunk), although the latter is perhaps the single most salient feature of elephants.
 Physical descriptors, however, are ranked low in the hierarchy.
 7.
 Implications for Memory Organization We have outlined how reasoning based on metaphors may proceed Now, consider another aspect ol metaphorical reasoning: H o w are metaphors lormed in ttw lirsi place'' Given the ubiquity of metaphor, it b e c o m e s strikingly apparent that h u m a n s generate metaphors as readily as they understand them, occasionally unconscious of the fact that they are creating (or more often instantiating) metaphors.
 The question that must be posed is more specific: What m e m o r y organization could enable, lacititale and encourage the continuous creation ol metaphors? If we assume that the invariance hierarchy is roughly correct, it provides a best first criterion for searching a content addressed episodic memory, organized along the gennral lines of Schank's M O P S (11,10).
 In investigating reminding and inference phenomena, Schank asseits that detecting similarities at every level of abstraction is the key to h u m a n m e m o r y organization Accepting this notion requires one to have a m e a n s of computing similarities a m o n g large numbers of potentially relevant episodic traces, both lor m e m o r y access and update The hierarchy above suggests that goal similarities are crucial, planning level similarities are almost as important, and similarities across other dimensions are of progressively lower importance.
 Hence, if m e m o r y were organized according to the computational criteria required for metaphor comprehension, it follows that a 294 hierarchical structure would result, where the categories (ormed are largely determined by groupings along the entries in the invariance hierarchy, the more invariant entries corresponding to more global organizing categories.
 The actual content o( the hierarchical memory is determined primarily by the idiosyncratic experience of the individual.
 Therefore, memory searchers lor "good metaphors" (those preserving high invariance properties) require less work (either to generate or comprehend) and may prove more rewarding for the understander as thev index relevant memory more readily.
 Metaphor is a linguistic realization of an inference phenomenon.
 As such, it should reflect underlying memory structure, as well as suggest the types ol inferences people can perform most readily if we ask why creative metaphors are used, the most logical answer appears to be that the writer is trying to induce the reader to perform the necessary inferences required to comprehend the new material.
 Metaphor serves as a vehicle to suggest a fruitful domain from which the relevant inferences can be mapped onto the new domain.
 Hence, when Senator Joe McCarthy refered to Communism as a "dreaded plague", he was inducing, in the minds of his listeners, the inference that communism must be actively "eradicated" or it will spread.
 The metaphor is effective only because the appropriate inference structure was already in existence in the source domain, and McCarthy knew this at the time he created the metaphor.
 An interesting avenue of future research is automating metaphor generation.
 If the model discussed here is essentially correct, metaphor generation requires that the writer have a model of the knowledge state (including goals, strategies, beliefs, etc.
) of his reader, as well as an integrated episodic memory where the computed similarity metric incorporates the invariance hierarchy.
 (I.
e , two domains are considered similar if the same types of problems and inference processes are present in planning effective behavior in both domains.
) In order to clear possible misconceptions, I emphasize that no distinct, localized, "conscious" existence for the invariance hierarchy is postulated as part of a human memory model.
 My hypothesis is that the regularities manilesled in the hierarchy are epiphcnomenal rellections ol human memory orgar)izalion and inlerence mechanisms.
 As such, the invariance hierarchy summarizes a phenomenon that must be explained by comprehensive memory organization models, and hence it ought to be taken into account in the model formulation process.
 8.
 Newell, A and Simon, H.
 A.
, Human Problem Solvirig, N e w Jersey: PrenticeHall, 1972.
 0.
 Reddy, M.
, "The Conduit Metaphor," in Metaphor and Thought.
 A.
 Ortony, ed, Cambridge University Press, 1979.
 10.
 Schank.
 R.
 C, "Reminding and Memory Organization.
 An Introduction to MOPS," Tech.
 report 170, Yale University Comp.
 Sci.
 Dept.
, 1979.
 11.
 Schank, R.
 C, "Language and Memory," Cognitive Science.
 Vol.
 4, No.
 3.
 1980 , pp.
 243284.
 12.
 Winston.
 P.
 H.
 "Learning and Reasoning by Analogy," CACM.
 Vol.
 23, No.
 12, 1979 , pp.
 689 703.
 References Anderson, J R.
, Language, Memory and Thought.
 New Jersey: Eribaum, 1976.
 Bransford, J D.
 and Johnson.
 M.
 K.
, "Considerations of Some Problems of Comprehension," in Visual tnlormalion Processing.
 W.
 G.
 Chase, ed.
.
 New York: Academic Press, 1973.
 Carbonell, J.
 G , "Metaphor A Key to Extensible Semantic Analysis," Proceedings ol Ihe tSlh Meeting ol the Association lor Computational Linguistics.
 1980 .
 Carbonell, J.
 G , "Learning by Analogy: Skill Acquisition in Reactive Environments," in Machine Learning, R.
 S.
 Michalski.
 J G Carbonell and T.
 M.
 Mitchell, eds.
.
 Palo Alto, CA: Tioga Pub.
 Co.
, 1981.
 Centner.
 D.
, "The Structure of Analogical Models in Science," Tech report 4451, Boll Beranek and Newman, 1980.
 Hobbs, J.
 R.
, "Metaphor, Metaphor Schemata, and Selective Inlerence," Tech report 204, SRI International, 1979.
 Lakolf, G.
 and Johnson, M.
, Metaphors We Live By, Chicago University Press, 1980.
 295 DUALSYSTEM PROCESSING IN LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION Jon M.
 Slack Open University, England 1 ImnRer.
y nnd LanRua(;e Unilerstanding Natural lanfjua^e parsers map linguistic input strin)?3 into symbolic, relational structures using syntactic knowlert(»e, semantic knowledRe, or both.
 However, no parser maps such inputs into image codes which implies that people building language understinding systems do not regard image generation and processing as a necessary part of language understanding.
 Within psychology, on the other hand, some researchers have advocated a strong relationship between image processing and language understanding for the past decade [l].
 The status of this view is by no means unequivocal amongst psychologists, and the debate about imagery has littered the pages of many an academic journal.
 To facilitate your reading of this paper it is worth stating that the work reported here is driven by the belief that image processing is an essential component of language understanding.
 2 Using Image Codes in Language Understanding If you ask people to outline the difference in meaning between the words strolling and sauntering they find the task relatively difficult.
 If you ask them how they arrived at their description, the majority of people state that they formed images of a person strolling, and sauntering, then compared these images generating the best verbal description of the differences between the two they could.
 This sort of protocol data suggests that it is necessary to process image codes in order to distineuish between the meanings of the two words.
 That is, at least part of the meaning of the words is represented in some form of image code.
 If this is the case, then for a natural languaf^e understanding system to di3ting\iish between sentences SI and S2 it needs to make recourse to the imagecoded SI The man strolled through the park.
 S2 The man sauntered through the park.
 components of the two verbs.
 This is not saying that an understanding system needs to map the sentences directly into image codes in isolation of other semantic structures.
 Rather, imipe processing is an essential component of the total processing involved in building cognitive structures which represent the differentiated meanings of the two sentences.
 T^ost existing language understanding systems parse linguistic inputs into some form of prepositional network which represents the conceptual relations corresponding to the meaning of the input [2],[3],[4].
 These systems never use nonpropositional codes, that is, language understanding is totally contained within a prepositional system.
 Using the work of Norman and Ruraelhart [5] as an example system, sentences SI and S2 would be parsed into the conceptual structures CI and C2, respectively.
 (The man) (The man) (through the park) Within this system the two sentences are differentiated in terms of the actional componenti which represent the physical actions which implement the movement component implicit in the meanings of the verbs.
 These actional components are associated with the image codes used in distinguishing the verbs.
 Kosslyn and his fellow researchers [6] have developed a detailed theory of image generation and processing which is backedup with a working computer simulation.
 He proposes that numerous cognitive tasks, in partiuclar sizecomparison an' sentenceverification tasks, involve the processing of both prepositional and image codes.
 The two types of codes and associated processes constitute independent, but connected, processing systems which run in parallel.
 Kosslyn's theory provides a good foundation on which to build a more adequate model of language understanding incorporating image processing in addition to existing ideas of prepositional processing.
 •5 Model of Language Understanding The protocol data described in section 2 suggests that the processing underlying the meaningdifferentiation task can be accounted for by model M1.
 H1 In line with the ideas embodied within Kosslyn's model, a dualsystem model of language understanding would have a structure similar to model M2.
 Access Lexical Rntry *• Generate Actional Images •Comparp Images ^ Translate results of image comparison into verbal response H2 Linguist! input "^ Parse into P code ^ f Generate T code k Process P code to complete comprehension t^sk J L Tran.
'Blation Processes 1 r Process I code to complete n̂fT.
n».
,V, Ann; ̂^ tisk 1 (The man) through the park! In H2 the Propositional code system (Psystem) and Image code system (Isystem ) are not strictly independent in that linguistic inputs are not mapped directly into imagps.
 Rather, the Icode is generatefi as a product of the parsing mechanism which maps the input into a Pcode.
 However, once the two codes are created they are processed separately, but knowledge can be passed from one system to the other by means of the translation processes.
 Model Ml is accommodated within model M2 by the Isystem and translation processes.
 But what arguments are there for advocating the addition of an image processing system to existing language understanding models? Argument 1: the Isystem has either sole access to, or more direct accpss to, knowledge which is 296 necessary for efficient langua(5e comprehension.
 This lcnowled(;e naybe represented only as Icodea.
 On the other hand, it could be coded within both the Iaystem und Paystem, but more accessible aa images.
 Argument 2: the Isystera is more efficient at processing large amounts of knowledge within specific task domains.
 For example, Icodea provide a more natural medium for processing knowledge of spatial relations [v].
 Further, Waltz [s] has argued that event simulation is an important aspect of language understanding, allowing the comprehension ayatem to make inferences about scenes and judge the plausibility of inputs during parsing.
 The Isystem is necessary for efficient processing of such event simulations.
 4 Support for dual processing in comprehension The imagery value of sentencer has been shown to exert a profound influence on coraprehenaion and memory tests [9],[l].
 Thorndyke [lo] has shown that subjects' imagery ratings for sentences vary inversely with comprehension RTs.
 Kosslyn's research project team have shown that imagery is used in sentenceverification tasks and for accessing knowledge of physical dimensions of objects.
 Further experimental evidence in support of Argument 1 is described below.
 Experiment 1 Subjects were shown simple subjectverbobject sentences and asked either to read them for understanding (condition 1) or to generate an image corresponding to the meaning of each sentence (condition 2).
 In condition 1, the comprehension RTs were measured.
 In condition 2, the imagegeneration time were measured.
 Following the presentation of the sentences, aubjecta in both conditions were given a recognition test.
 For each target sentence in the test there were two distractor sentences which only differed from the target sentence in terms of the verb.
 However, the verbs in the distractor sentences were close in meaning to the target sentence verb, as shown below.
 Target sentence: The man strolled through the park Distractors: The man sauntered through the park The man walked through the park The results showed that the comprehension times for stimulus sentences are lower than the imagegeneration times.
 However, the probability of recognising a target sentence is much higher in the imagegeneration condition than the comprehension condition.
 This implies that Ss access information in the image generated for each sentence which allows them to distinguish between a target sentence and the semantically close distractors.
 Of course, the results are open to more than one interpretation because the difference in recognition probablities between the two conditions could be due to the difference between comprehension and imagegeneration times.
 To take account of this possibility, the experiment was repeated in a modified form.
 Experiment 2 Subjects in condition 1, rather than just read the stimulus sentences were ariked to categorize them according to whether the actions they described involved an object as an instrument of the action.
 For example, f'̂ ntence SI would be classed as HO INSTRUMENT, whereas S3 would be classed as INVOLVING AN INSTRUMENT.
 The categorization RTs were measured.
 The rest of the S3 The chef chopped the vegetables.
 experiment was the same as Expt.
 1, The results showed that the categorization times were slightly longer than the image generation times, but the recognition probabilitiea were higher for the image generation condition than the categorization condition.
 Thus, the results seem to support the conclusions derived from the first experiment.
 These experiments seem to imply that Ss access knowledge via images which allows them to differentiate semantically close verbs.
 However, it would seem that Ss do not access this knowledge in the normal process of comprehension as evidenced by the poor recognition performance in the comprehension condition.
 This can be construed aa evidence againat the involvraent of imagery in language underatanding, but if the I system takes longer than the P system to process an input then the I system may be used as a backup processing capacity which ia only resorted to when P system proceasing has failed, or proved inadequate.
 Evidence for this notion comes from work on the comprehension of metaphor which shows that people use imagery to work out the meanings of figurative inputs [Note l].
 The experiment below providea further aupport for this idea.
 Experiment 3  Subjects had to judge whether stimulus sentences were semantically acceptable or not and the decision RTs were measured.
 The sentences were constructed so that they would be easy to classify, in either direction, or difficult to classify leading to a bimodal distribution in decision times.
 The same sentences were used in an image generation task and the response times were measured.
 As expected, the results showed a strong bimodel distribution for the decision RTs; Ss tended to be either quick or slow at making judgements.
 The important findings, however, were that (i) there was no significant difference between the image generation times for fastRT sentences and slowRT sentences, and (ii) the correlation between image generation time and decision RT was high for slow judgements, but low for fast judgements.
 These results imply that when Ss have difficulty in judging the semantic acceptability of a sentence they base the judgement on image coded data rather than knowledge stored in prepositional form which is the case for more straightforward judgements.
 The evidence presented in this section gives weight to the theory that image processing is an important component of language understanding.
 Specifically, the data show that (i) image codes represent knowledge not directly available to the Psystem, but which needs to be accessed in certain coraprehenaion tasks, and (ii) image processing is often employed to solve linguistic problems.
 5 Building a complete Language Understander To build a flexible language understander with powerful problem solving capabilities it is necessary to augment existing Psystem parsers by adding image generation and processing routines.
 The Isystem and Psystem would function in parallel, with the latter producing a skeletal parse adequate for some comprehension tasks.
 The Isystem would generate a richer (semantically) parse, but over a longer time course.
 When the Psystem output satisfies the requirements of the comprehension task image processing is terminated, uncompleted, and the understander passes on to the next input.
 If, on the other hand, the output from the Psystem is inadequate for the comprehension task, then the richer Isystem output is used to solve the problem.
 At any processing stage after generation, image codes can be inspected and potentially translatable elements of a code can be passed over to the Psystem in order to generate a verbal response.
 The Isystem has no direct output mechanism.
 Kosslyn's computer simulation of his Isystem theory fll] provides a good basis for a working image processing component which can be knitted 297 into a Paystera parser, although it needs to be extended to take account of dynamic images and event simulations.
 It is not clear how his system would RPnrrate an ima^e of a man strolling, as he does not specify how it is possible for components of an ina^e to move relative to each other in a meaningful way.
 To implement an event simulation of sentence SI it is necessary to access and run over time an ordered sequence of "key" image frames which represent the actional component of the verb 'stroll'.
 If you imagine a continuous motion sequence to be broken down into a series of static images, then the key images are those which have a high information content in that they distinguish between the meanings of different verbs.
 Such images might correspond to a discontinuity in the movement sequence, or a change of direction of motion of an image element.
 These sets of key image frames should be abstract enough to take different objects/agents of an action as the content of the image.
 The actional component of the verb within the Psystem would be linked to its corresponding key image frame sequence within the Isystem, tnd when the actional component is accessed during parsing the key image frame sequence would be run in the Isystem to generate the event simualtion.
 At the same time, the other Psystem elements accessed during parsing, corresponding to the arguments of the verb, would activate object images to form the content of the event simulation.
 These object images would be interpreted by the key image frame sequence to produce the dynamic image.
 These ideas have only been discussed in the context of representing the verbs of movement, but they could be generalised to provide a basis for generating the full range of dynamic images and event simulations.
 [11] Kosslyn, S.
M.
, and Shwartz, S.
P.
 A simulation of visual imagery.
 Cognitive Science.
 1, 265295.
 1977.
 Reference notes Note 1.
 Slack, J.
M.
 Metaphor Comprehension special mode of language processing? Paper presented at the 18th.
 annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Philadelphia, June I98O.
 6 References [1] Paivio, A.
 Imagery and Verbal Processes.
 Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York, 1971.
 [2] Schank, R.
C.
 Identification of conceptualizations underlying natural language.
 In R.
 Schank and K.
 Colby (eds.
), Computer nodels of thought and language.
 Freeman, San Francisco, 1973.
 [3] Wilks, Y.
A.
 Grammar, Meaning, and the Machine Analysis of Lanfruaee.
 Routledge, London, 1972.
 [4] Rumelhart, D.
E.
 and Levin, J.
A.
 A language comprehension system.
 In D.
A.
 Norman and D.
E.
 Rumelhart (eds.
).
 Explorations in cognition.
 Freeman, San Francisco, 1975.
 [5] Norman, D.
A.
 and Rumelhart D.
E.
 Explorations in cognition.
 Freeman, San Francisco, 1975[6] Kosslyn, S.
H.
 Image and Mind.
 Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
, 1980.
 [7] Boggess, L.
C.
 Computational interpretation of English spatial prepositions.
 Unpublished Ph.
D.
 dissertation.
 Computer science department.
 University of Illinois, Urbana, 1978.
 [s] Waltz, D.
L.
 Generating and understanding scenen descriptions.
 In Joshi, Tap and Webber (eds.
), Elements of discourse understanding.
 Cambridge University Press, London, 1980.
 [° ] Paivio, A, and Begg, I.
 Imagery and comprehension latencies as a function of sentence concreteness and structure.
 Research Bulletin No.
 154, department of Psychology, University of Western Ontario, 1970.
 [10] Thorndykc, P.
W.
 Conceptual complexity and Inapr>ry in Comprehension and Memory.
 Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 14, 359569, 1975.
 298 METAPHOR AS NONLITERAL SIMILARITY Odella E.
 Schattin and Hartvig Oahl INTRODUCTION.
 In many current theories, metaphors are thought of as covert or implied nonliteral comparisons, which are comprehended by reference to their underlying literal comparison statements, i.
e.
 similes.
 This view can be traced back to Aristotle, and is evident in more recent accounts of metaphor comprehension (e.
g.
 Kintsch, 1974; Miller, 1979; Searle, 1979).
 This prevalent theory of metaphors is challenged by that of Ortony (1979a, 1979b, in press).
 While Ortony agrees with the notion of metaphors as implied comparisons, he contends that this "reduction" theory does little to explain the comprehension process involved in understanding metaphors.
 It is misleading, Ortony argues, to understand a metaphor in terms of its corresponding simile because the comparison referred to in the simile itself is often metaphorical in nature.
 In his words: ".
.
.
 the difference between the metaphor and its corresponding similarity statement is not that one is metaphorical and the other literal; the difference is that one is an indirect statement whereas the other is a direct one.
" (Ortony, 1979a, p.
 177) He proposes an alternative theory based on Tversky's (1977) contrast model which utilizes feature matching.
 According to Ortony, the comprehension of a metaphor involves assessing the attributes or features which Its topic and vehicle have in common.
 What is required for a good metaphor is that these shared attributes be more highly salient features of the vehicle term than of the topic term.
 This salience imbalance is one important mechanism which is involved in metaphor comprehension.
 Another important aspect of Ortony's account is that the attributes shared by the topic and vehicle need not be identical.
 They need only be similar to each other.
 This similarity between the shared attributes can be, and often is, metaphorical in nature.
 Thus, another major concept in Ortony's theory is that of metaphorical or nonlilexai Bimilarity.
 The present experiment is a preliminary study intended to test this notion that the basis for a good metaphor is nonliteral similarity.
 It is expected that the judged goodness of a metaphor will depend on two factors: a perceived similarity between the statement's two components, and the characterization of this similarity as nonliteral.
 Statements whose components are perceived to be literally similar will be judged low in quality, as will statements whose components are exceedingly dissimilar.
 It is also hypothesized that similarity and literalness are different, although related, dimensions.
 METHOD.
 Design.
 The main part of the experiment involved obtaining ratings on three dimensions of 25 comparisons in the form of "Topic is like Vehicle", chosen in pretesting to represent the full scale range of "goodness" on a 9polnt scale.
 The 25 statements ranged from 4 to 10 words in length with a mean length of 6 words.
 Procedure.
 Six subjects, three males and three females, were asked to rate the statements first on similarity, then on literalness and finally on goodness or aptness.
 The order of tasks remained constant across subjects, but the statements were randomized differently for each of the three scales, and these randomizations were different for each subject.
 RESULTS.
 The results Indicate that the raters used the three scales reliably; the mean Coefficient Alpha was .
82.
 Furthermore, the 25 statements used in the study provided a representative sample which extends over the range of each scale.
 Thus the implications pointed out below (see Discussion) are backed by a set of reliable scales and by metaphors which distribute uniformly along these scales.
 Figure 1 is a scatterplot of the relationship between literalness and goodness.
 There is a significant negative linear correlation between these two scales (r  .
67, p < .
0001).
 As can be seen in Figure 2, although there is no significant linear correlation between similarity and goodness, there is a significant (r  .
60, p < .
006) curvilinear relationship.
 In fact, a good fit was obtained using a quadratic relationship between similarity and goodness, as represented by the equation underneath Figure 2.
 While predictions of goodness from literalness were quite successful, they do not teOce into account the interaction of literalness with similarity.
 This interaction is evident in Figure 3, which is a scatterplot of the relationship between similarity and literalness.
 This figure indicates that at low values of literalness, similarity is only narginally related to literalness but at high values of literalness, similarity is rather well predicted by literalness.
 As it turns out, this variance along the similarity dimension can be used to further Improve our predictions of goodness (G).
 The best fitting quadratic relationship incorporating both similarity (S) and literalness (L) is represented by the following equation: O  1.
86 + .
74L  .
16L* + .
77S Using this model, the predicted goodness ratings were plotted as d function of the observed goodness ratings.
 The resulting scatterplot can be seen in Figure 4.
 There is a highly significant positive correlation (r  .
92, p < .
00003) between the values generated by the model (predicted goodness) and those generated by the raters (observed goodness), thus accounting for 84% of the variance in the goodness ratings.
 DISCUSSION.
 Our results support Ortony's rejection of the "reductionist" viewpoint of metaphor comprehension.
 We have shown that even statements traditionally referred to as "similes" vary in the degree to which their components are perceived as literally similar.
 Thus, the "reductionists'" claim that a metaphor must be converted to its underlying "simile" in order to be understood, is not well founded.
 Instead, we offer an alternative theory incorporating the notion of nonliteral similarity as the basis for good metaphorlcity.
 A viable interpretation of our model requires examining each component of the best fit quadratic equation: G  1.
86 + .
74L .
16L + .
77S Note that at low levels, the literalness components become positive and the relationship becomes additive.
 As we have already noted in our discussion of Figure 3, at low levels of literalness, similarity can vary over a large range.
 Thus, at these low levels of literalness, if similarity is low then the goodness of a metaphor will also be low.
 If, on the other hand, while literalness is low similarity is high, the resulting goodness value will also be high.
 S>, we have arrived at a quantitative illustration of nonliteral similarity as the best predictor of a good metaphor.
 299 REPTKDICES Klntsch, W.
 Zhe r«pra«iint«tlon ol BCMing Xa asaaa Hillside, N.
 J.
 lErlbaun, 1974.
 Miller, G.
 K.
 Inagea and models, similes and metaphors.
 In A.
 Ortony (2d.
) Metachot A&d thouyht• Cambridge, EnglandiCambridge Dniversity Press, 1979.
 Ortony, A.
 Beyond literal similarity.
 PsyphQloglC&l SexXSM, 1979a, U (3), 161180.
 Ortony, A.
 The role of similarity in similes and metaphors.
 In A.
 Ortony (Ed.
) Metaphor And thought• Cambridge, EnglandiCambridge University Press, 1979b.
 Ortony, A.
 Understanding metaphors.
 In D.
 O'Bare (Ed.
) PavcholojY AOd Ihfi AXtfl.
 HasSOCks, England I Harvest Press, in press.
 Searle, J.
 Metaphor.
 In A.
 Ortony (Ed.
) Metaphor and thought Cambridge, EnglandiCambridge University Press, 1979.
 Tversky, A.
 Features of similarity.
 PsYcholooical BezifiH, 197', ai, 327352.
 I ? e is s « (I i> ^ 2 1 1 2 5 « S 6 ; I 9 600WIESS MIIWS Fieua, 1 1 2 J « 5 6 7 I 9 COCD'IIS! MIINCS Ss ' '.
 i" ! 2 ! ' 1 2 ! > 5 6 7 » 9 llttMUItrS M1IIKS Fjmii J t • ̂  M .
 « 771 .
 Sis' "! ! ! — ! — 5 — 5 — f — ! — ^ ^imr\ 8^ .
 0.
7m • 0 ]rL2 .
 0 77S fJ 300 A THEORY OF INTELLIGENCE by: P.
 J.
 vanHeerden POLAROID RESEARCH LABORATORIES 750 MAIN STREET, CAMBRIDGE.
 MASSACHUSETTS The basis of this theory of intelligence, in man or animal, is a model.
 The model is a computer, "the brain', with input channels and output channels.
 Shannon, in his theory of information^) has shown that all information channels can be presented in the form of binary time series, sequences of ones and zeros only, as for instance 101101 This is so because any record of events or things in the real worldbe it photographs, television tapes, audio tapes, written or printed material, or any other imaginable record contains only a finite amount of information.
 Therefore, the model of intelligence can be a finite "̂ tate digital computer, having only binary time series as inputs and outputs.
 A further choice will be made in the model It will be assumed that the program, that is the set of instructions given to the computer to make it into a model of intelligence, is independent of the size of the computer.
 This means that the model for intelligence in man, mouse, octopus or ant is the same in principle, although the amount of information processing needed to model human intelligence is clearly much larger than in the model of an ant.
 It is almost silently implied that the program for the computer, to make it into a model of intelligence, is completely independent of the "actual meaning" of the information being processed.
 In a binary computer, the machine can only see the difference between the symbol 1 and the symbol 0, and nothing more.
 If a man is hungry he will try to satisfy his hunger by eating.
 That is intelli^^ent.
 The general principle of intelligence will be considered the generalization of that statement: "To be intelligent is to try to satisfy one'"? personal drives".
 However, one could not understand man, or social cmimals, without assuming the existence of several independent social drivesas for instance the parental instinctswhich may very well overrule the drive of hunger in specific situations.
 If one is hungry, it may still be more satisfying to feed one's child than to eat one self.
 Man's spectrum of social drives has been very well represented for instance in the work of the social psychologist William MacDougall^) The drives will be represented in the model as a number of input time series to the computer.
 To satisfy one's drives one has to act, operate on the outside world, in some way.
 one may for instance ask where to find a restaurant, one may walk to it, one may pick up a menu.
 it will be assumed that intelligence results in commands to the muscles, as to the tongue in speaking, the legs in walking, the hand in holding the menu.
 These commands will be represented in the model as the output binary time series of the computer.
 There are, besides the drives, a second type of input time series needed for intelligent action.
 These are the channels which carry the information from the senses, as the eyes and ears, without which intelligent action would hardly be possible.
 we now have all the components of the model of intelligence: a digital computer, with two types of binary input time series, and one type of binary output series.
 Let us arrange them in a aiagram: Model of Intelligence Past Present Human Drives Hi(1),h^(2),H^(3).
.
.
.
 Hi{n), (as hunger, received h,(1).
H,(2).
ri,(3) H(n), .
.
o.
_̂ the .
oay .
.
 t.
e „^ ,„ .
 „^ ,„ .
 „, ,3, .
 .
 .
 .
 H^n, .
 Human Senses S^ (1),5^(2),Si(3) S^lnl (information flow 82(1), from eyes, ears etc.
 to the brain) commands to muscles Ci(1),Ci(2),C^(3),.
.
.
.
 C^ln), (the information flow Cjll) Cjin), in the nerves from the brain to hand, tongue or foot) H^fn+l),.
.
 H2(n+1),.
.
 H3in+1),.
, Si'n+l), Ci (n+1) c>(n+l) H, S, C are all binary functions at specific intervals of time t; for instance Hi(L\)=l, Hj(t=2)=0, llĵ (t=3)=0, etc.
 The intervals 't1 may ue 1 second, 0.
1 second or the like.
 [It is well known that the observing brain also acts on glands m the body to prepare it fnr action: the sight of food stimulates the digestive juices, the sigi.
t of fearsome things puts adrenalin into the blood, etc.
 Although t.
iis is not muscular action, the function, logically speaking is ao similar to muscular action that it will be incorporated in the model as channels Cy, Cĵ +i etc.
] All we have to do now to finish the model of intelligence is to add a computer program that constructs, from the series ^l' H2.
.
.
,Si, S2and C^, 02.
.
.
, the output series Cj^, C2   The aim of the prograr.
 is to make the future digits of H,, H, equal to zero.
 H=0 will be assumed a satisfied drive.
 H=l an active drive.
 It must be clear that one cannot expect a strictly causal relation between our future desires H and our present muscular activity.
 When one is out in the middle of a desert, it will be hard to come up with an immediate action to satisfy one's hunger or thirst.
 One can only ask for the best one can do, that IS as many O's as possible in the future of the H's, on the basis of one's limited capabilities.
 Our program needs a theory of prediction.
 It is clear that such a theory should exist.
 People do learn to satisfy their needs by their actions.
 We call that skill, experience, insight, intelligence, "know how" or wisdom.
 One is not continuously succesful by just sheer luck.
 We also believe, on the basis of modern science, that the learning process takes place by information processing in the brain, analogous to what digital computers do.
 Does a theory of prediction exist? I will propose one3) to you.
 it is my view that such a theory, through the work on information theory, by Shannon and others, has become almost selfevident.
 The knowledge, that one can work with binary time series only, and arrive at a completely general theory, has certainly eliminated all mathematical difficulties.
 The only problem is scientific: to propose a theory that conforms to the intuitive expectations we have, as intelligent beings, about the future, TO begin, assume a binary time series f(t), and f(l)=l, f(2)=0, f(3)=l, f(4)=0, f(5)=l, f(6)=0.
 What is f(7), f(8), etc.
? Let me write down the pattern: 101010.
.
.
.
 One has the intuitive expectation that It will continue with 1010, Can we now find the reason for this intuitive expectation and formulate it as a general theory for all possible situations of binary time series? Suppose one gives a specific time series to a group of scientists, experts in analysing information: 1011010010101010001110 Let the time series be a long one, say a million digits, and one asks them to predict the future of the series.
 Naturally they will want to know what the time series represent, so they have some clues: is it the binary encoding of some spoken, or written language, the song of a bird, a television program? But they are told that a new born baby does not have the privilege of knowing what the world is all about.
 it receives signals from its eyes and ears and stomach and does not know what they mean.
 But in five or ten years it grows up into an intelligent being which knows a lot.
 why should a group of accomplished scientists be entitled to more? So the experts start analysing the time series by all the means they have available and end up confessing that the series look very random to them, and therefore there is little to predict.
 One then gives them the clue that it may represent the first million digits of /̂  , written in binary digits.
 They try it and it fits perfectly.
 They will then have a strong intuitive expectation that also the future digits of the series will be represented by /rz Are they certain that this expectation will turn out correct? No, nothing is certain in the real world.
 It is simply the best prediction they have as rational beings on the basis of the available information.
 This example shows the way to the general formulation of a theory of rational prediction.
 There would have been no reason to associate the time series with Jf̂  , because /I would have been just one hypothesis out of a billion others one could come up with.
 But once a hypothesis has been tried and shown to conform to the presently given series, we have a strong intuitive confidence that this makes a valuable prediction, so the theory says: since all hypotheses are apriori equivalent, choose a handy package of hypotheses which is readily formulated, easily stored and efficiently tested.
 There exists one such handy package.
 It is: "compare the present time series with all its own pasts.
" For a million digit series, we have a million independent hypotheses without any effort.
 There is no other set of hypotheses i have been able to think of that matches this one in efficiency.
 I therefore hypothesize that this IS the system used by all living creatures endowed with intelligence, great or small.
 There are a few things to be specified before the theory is complete: The first one is that one must allow a percentage of error in the comparison of the present time series with the hypotheses.
 Otherwise one may find that not a single hypothesis is confirmed.
 The second one is that one can demand a match of the time series with the hypothesis, not over the whole series but only over an unspecified period back into the past.
 Then, if one has several hypotheses matching the time series, one over 10 digits one over 100 digits say, of the most recent past, one selects as the best prediction that one hypothesis which has matched the time series over tlie longest most recent past.
 There is one more supplement to the theory which seems desirable.
 In our model, there is not just one time series, but a large number of series.
 We have presented the past, of Drives, Senses and commands to muscles information as a two dimensional tableau of ones and zeros.
 To predict, we compare the present tableau not ]ust with the tableaus we obtain by going 1,2,3 or more digits to the left.
 Instead, we also allow movements up and down.
 We investigate the match of the present tableau with all 301 other tableaus we obtain by going any riLunber of ateps to the left combined with any number of steps up or down.
 The theory says that the brain is programmed to test n hypotheses, where the infornidtion stored by previous events in the life of the intelligent individual is n bits.
 It then selects the one hypothesis which conforms best to the present si",,.
 tuation.
 For humans, this may require the testing of 10^ to 10 hypotheses.
 And don't forget, this task is performed not ^ust once, but again and again, every time interval t of 0.
1 seconds may be.
 Clearly that is an enormous computational task! There must therefore be short cuts.
 TO finish however, we must consider two situations.
 The first one is the case that the prediction leads to an increased satisfaction of the drives, an increased number of zeros.
 That IS the easy one.
 The brain simply produces the corresponding commands to the muscles from its memory.
 This is as in the pleasant situation where one drives home after work in light traffic.
 One knows what to do.
 The second possibility is that the prediction is one of increased anxiety.
 "One enjoys one's dinner at home and notices through the window one'*= creditors converge on the front door" Or: "one enters one'« home and finds a boa constrictor in the living room" what is now the model for the automatic instruction to the muscles? These questions are not answered as readily, and clearly require more discussion.
 April 24, 1081 References 1 C.
 E.
 Shannon and W.
 l\eaver "The Mathematical Theory of Communication," The university of Illinois Press, Urbana 1949 2 w.
 MacDougall "An Introduction of Social Psychology," Barnes and Noble, New York 1960 (originally 1908) 3 P.
J.
 vanHeerden "The Foundation of Empirical Knowledge," wistik, Wassenaar, Netherlands, 1968 302 A TETRAGENIC FRAME FOR MODELLING UNMEDIATED KNOWLEDGE ACQUISITION* Egon E.
 Loebner Computet Reserach Center HewlettPackatd Laboratories The question 'How does knowledrje qet into human heads?' has been ; jked many times before.
 In this paper the question Is narrowed and sharpened two times.
 The first time, all knowledge mediated throuqh direct contact with other human beings, as well as throuqh various communication technologies, is exluded.
 Such knowledge has often been called immediate knowledge.
 In order not to prejudge the timing aspects of the acquisition process, it is called unmediated knowledge instead.
 This excludes all knowledge obtained throuqh education as well as most learning activities.
 It thus restricts knowledge acquisition to processes through which people discover facts by themselves, invent their own solutions to problems and, without being told, shown or otherwise guided, figure out meanings of facts.
 Obviously unmediated knowledge cannot be experimented with apart from mediated knowledge without Infraction of ethical codes.
 Unmediated knowledge acquisition Is synonymous with knowledge generation.
 It is therefore referred to as gnomogenesls.
 The second sharpening of the above question comes from restricting it to gnomogenlc events whose products are being reported for the first time.
 This restriction minimizes the probability that the knowledge had been obtained by mediation.
 By singling out for study those gnomogenlc events which are associated with recognized inventors, discoverers, explorers, designers, experimenters and theorizets, a mote refined examination of gnomogenesls becomes possible.
 These six types of individuals ate responsible for conttibutIons in science, technology, art and politics.
 They often become singled out for special attention and, on occasion, their cognitive processes become sctutIni zed.
 While one cannot sharply distinguish the six types of individuals, they can be associated with six cognitive processes expi:rii;nced observation Discovering Expenmenhng FORMAL REASON NG Exploring Designing Theorizing INTUITIVE / INSIGHT / Inventing PURPOSEFUL ACTION Model of Unmediated Knowledge Acquisition responsible for their designations.
 These processes are inventing, discovering, exploring, designing, experimenting and theorizing.
 They are displayed, together with the fout Insttumentalltles of gnomongenesis ftom which they can be derived, in the above figure.
 Since the best document gnomogenlc phenomena are f fields of science and technol the discussion with their p cognitive processes of di invention.
 Discovery is a finding out something that wa unknown.
 A classical exa discovery of a new element In a new particle In physics.
 discovery has been made and the scientific community the includes not only belief in t of such an element or parti ed cases of ound in the ogy, we begin toducts, the scovery and process of s previously mple Is a chemistry or After the accepted by common belief he existence cle but also •Based on material taught dating the late 60 a gtaduate course entitled 'Introduction to s and early 70's at Stanford Unlversi the Heuristics of Invention and Disco 303 the belief that It existed before the discovery event, even though it had not been known prior to the event.
 It Is important to note that.
its name is closely associated with the concept of uncovering.
 This implies the removal of an obstacle to observation.
 This obstacle is situational.
 The situation can be conditioned in the physical world or in the belief system the discoverer shares with his contemporaries.
 The discoverer removes the obstacle to perception and makes his act known.
 His peers confirm the new perceptions of the, now more easily accessed, object of discovery.
 The act of invention differs from the act of discovery.
 It calls for contriving and fabricating something that had its origin in someones imagination.
 It becomes realized only after its idea became established in the mind of the inventor.
 When the act of invention is complete and the invention turns into fact, the common belief that the invention didn t exist before the act remains.
 While discovering deals with externalities, inventing deals with insight.
 It engages the more private aspects of the inventor's cognition.
 The idea for a wireless telegraph Is a new composite with Hertzdiscovered radiowaves replacing wire for the purpose of signal transmission over long distances.
 The idea preceded building of the device.
 When analyzing inventive cognition one finds introspection combined with the aim of outward demonstration of a product.
 Analysis of the cognitive process of discovery however indicates an outward looking aimed at an inner restructuring of situational understanding.
 A test, based on psycholinguistics, can verify that discovery and Invention are not interchangeable.
 We speak of 'discovering the truth', but not of 'inventing truth*.
 We do say that 'a lie has been invented*.
 A 'discovery of a lie* could however be interpreted as a discovery of the existence of a lie, after It had been created.
 Thus we consider invention and discovery to be opponents in a similar sense that blue and yellow are opponents in the psychophysical space of color.
 This we symbolize by assigning them to two nonintersecting edges of a polyhedron.
 It is necessary to when dealing with socal full distinction cannot drawn between discover While in some sense they another sense they ar Here the concept of introduced into quantum for the purpose of escap the particlewave dualil useful guide for the incompatibles.
 We plan matter below.
 exercise caution led opponents.
 A and should not be y and Invention.
 are opposites In e not different.
 complementar ity, physics by Bohr ing the dilemma of ty, can become a simultaneity of to discuss this A strong case for conplenentarity can be made for the second pair of gnomogenic processes: Experimenting and theorizing.
 That the former deals with matters external to a cognitive system, and the latter with those internal to it, need not a group of scientists.
 swings between passive active manipulation of latter between internal passive looking, literally intuiting, and internal manipulation of abstraact objects needs no demonstration to practitioners of the art of doing science.
 The case for complementarity for the third pair of cognitions may be less obvious.
 Exploring deals with external observing of objects whose internal existence has been anticipated through internal visualization, while designing deals with internal manipulation that anticipates external manipulation of concrete objects.
 Those familiar with lattice theory know that the six edges of a tetrahedron derive from forming logical unions between all of its four vertices.
 Equivalently the six gnomogenic functions could be derived by forming unions between four terms that suitably represent the labeled concepts at the vertices of the figure*s tetrahedron.
 The product of two twovalued attributes will do that.
 The first attribute Is MODE of cognition.
 Its value is perceiving, P, or atcualizinq, A.
 The second Is TENDANCE of cognition, signifying attendance of the environment or the self, with values E and S respectively.
 The tetragenic vertices of the tetrahedron become PE, AE, AS and PS in turn for top, bottom, left and right.
 The above simple but powerful axioms lead directly and systemically to a derivation of the four sources and six functions of unmediated knowledge acquisition.
 The high symmetry of this model*s framework points to ease of manipulation and suggests some relationship between theories of cognitive science and those of particle physics.
 What kind of technical meaning can we assign to the space bounded by the edges of the tetrahedron which Is depicted In the above figure? Having labeled the edges with the six gnomogenic functions, paired Into three opponents or complements, one can recognize such a space as belonging to psychophysics and psychonetrics which, as Stevens points out, utilize the same scale to measure aspects of subjective responses (sensations, perceptions, judgments, etc.
) and people (Inventors, discoverers, etc.
).
 Such space expresses relations between the subjective gnomogenic processes or between people assigned in accordance with the dominant function they exercise when they generate new knowledge.
 This space can also be utilized to chart the sequence followed by a single scientist, inventor, technologist, etc.
, mapping progression of his ideations after their articulation.
 Such graphs can display differences among such individuals and identify their strengths as well as weaknesses.
 They make possible recognition of dominant traits, such as observational power, reasoning power and the like.
 be justified to That the former observation and externals and the Models similar model have been preSocratIc philo formulated the four composition of pond after 2000 years wer earth, water, air an current theory of ov elements, called at are today subdivided parts, and so on to this tetragenic used before.
 A sopher, Empedocles, element model of the erable matter.
 Only e the four elements of d fire replaced by the et a hundred chemical cms.
 However, these Into more primitive Nevertheless the 304 original Idea, that matter is to be thought of as composed of more elemental parts, still prevails.
 The tetraqenic model of gnomogenesis should be considered in a similar light.
 It accounts for the psychophysical fact that perceptions, judgements and attitudes can be decomposed into more primitive elements.
 Another model is Carl Jung's attitudinal model of Individual types.
 It contains three pairs of opponents that are not equivalent.
 The extrovertedintroverted pair is major, and the thinkingfeeling and sensingintuiting pairs are minor.
 Jung's theory states that one major and one minor faculty always dominate the personality of an individual.
 This leads to an eightfold typology of individuals.
 By "feelinq" Carl Jung meant the "faculty of weighing and evaluating experience", which he thought as rational as the intellectual "faculty of thinking".
 By "sensing" he meant the "faculty of objective presentation" and by "intuiting" "an involuntary act that lacks judgment".
 Our tetragenic model differs from Jung's and other models interpreting intuition.
 This difference leads not only to a Jiffetinj interpretation of its relationship to the other gnomoqenic instrumentalities of cognition, but also points toward a need to investigate different experimental phenomena within the psychology of intuition.
 Let us examine a few authoritative descriptions and definitions of intuition.
 Quinton distinguishes between two kinds of definitions of intuition: one ordinary and the other technical.
 According to the ordinary one, intuitions are expressed by making rapid and accurate assertions about matters of fact in circumstances where reliance on standard procedure is ruled out.
 This ordinary, nontechnical, sense has been adopted by experimental psychloglsts such as Hebb and Westcott when designinq their experiments to test for intuitive behavior in human subjects.
 Among the technical ones, the most familiar definition describes intuition as the power of obtaining knowledge which cannot be acquired by either inference or observation, reason or experience.
 There is little question that Peirce, one of the clearest thinkers and a great philosopher of knowledge, believed that the genetic endowment of man includes, besides animal instincts and everyday "common sense", most Importantly, "in the cognitive domain a sense of the plausible regarding of the workings of nature" A remarkable articulation of the nature of intuition comes from Eaton, a virtually unknown American philosopher of knowledge, who wrote during the 20's Intuition gives us knowledge, left over clearly conceived or sensed in the object (the Individuality of a pebble picked uo on the beach) has been analyzed away".
 Eaton was critical of Berqson's antilntellectualistic philosophy which equated Intuition with "pure awatness" and by setting It on its own feet and thus severing "rational thought from the nonconceptual medium into which ani from Me stated: "What Is a residue of when all that Is which viole "at effor concr remin descr say In tree cogni sensa it flows nee to th coqnltion t to fas ete in escent of Ibed Berg g that B branch on tion as tion and Eaton e coqnitl abstract ten on th it".
 Thi that give son's theo ergson wa which he "a fus intui tion" saw Bergson doing ve act in looking ly in the very at which is most s description Is n by Einstein, who ry of intuition by s sawing off the sat.
 Eaton saw ion of reason.
 The psychophysical tetragenic model, which we propose for cognition, is an extension of Eaton's theory of knowledge, which recognizes as the three inseparable instrumentalities of knowledge; reason, sensation and intuition.
 We have added a fourth instrumentality, purposeful action, and also have renamed slightly the other three.
 With hindsight, that uses knowledge produced recently by molecular biologists and computer scientists, we suggest that intuitive insight perceives facts about plausible workings of nature indirectly through examination of the intulter's own physiological structure which has been constructed from genetic plans supplied by preceeding generations.
 This explanation provides not only a plausible hypothesis as to the origin of a priori knowledge, but also to the mechanism by which this knowledge is being constantly enhanced.
 It also suggests the possibility of providing intelligent machines with the power of Intuition if a way can be found for the machines to gain information through inner examination of their own structure, whether hardware or software.
 Experienced observation is much more than pure sensation.
 The whole cognitive system is attuned to Integrate perceptual regularities, which map the structure of the cognlzer's environment Into his own, as they are transmitted through his senses and higher level cognitive processors.
 As pointed out by N.
 R.
 Hanson, scientific observation is inseparably loaded with theory.
 It should be kept in mind that the experimenter swings between observation and contrived circumstance just as the theorlzer wanders between Insight into his subject matter and skillful use of his reasoning methodology.
 By experimenter's contrived circumstance Is meant an elaborate experimental setup, loaded with Instruments so that the capture of the observed phenomenon is obtained under well understood, if not completely controlled conditions.
 The quantum physicist has taught us that pure observation without interference from the purposeful act of measurement violates the principle of uncertainty.
 This means that, in general, psychophysical phenomena should be mapped only in the interior of the tetrahedron.
 That is a consequence of Eaton's concept of fusion of all the Instrumentalities Juting the cognitive act.
 A similar explanation holds for the nature of theorizing.
 Swinging between intellectual reasoning and Intuition is a tenet of Bergson's theory of knowledge as well Our model describes a special theory 305 of cognition which may eventually provide additional leads toward a more general understanding of cognitive functions.
 Its interdisciplinary approach draws on special knowledge in physics, psychophysics, psychology, biology, logic, computer science and philosophy.
 The provisional results point toward the possibility of generalizing physic's indeterminacy principle to six principles of indeterminacy for each of the cognitive functions formed from the four gnomogenic sources.
 For psychology the tetragenic model points toward a better formalization of metapsychological approaches to cognition, where psychologists study the workings of psychologists as well as other scientists.
 We believe that phrases containing terms like "obvious", "selfevident" and "must" are direct pointers to intuitive Insights of theorizers and inventors, when they use them during reports and descriptions of their accomplishments.
 We think that insufficient attention is currently given to intuition by cognitive science.
 Using uptodate tools, studies could follow directions indicated already by Hovland's "invention of entirely new concepts" and by Wertheimer's "productive thinking".
 For the field of machine intelligence intuition points toward the design of machines which have power to gleen knowledge about the intentions of their designers by intuiton, that is examination of their own hardware and software structures and fusing that knowledge with the knowledge obtained from the other three instrumentalities, which are already part of the stateoftheart of computers.
 306 SURREALISTIC IMAGERY t THE CALCULATION OF BEHAVIOR Sheldon Klein, Devid A.
 Ross, Hark S.
 Hanasse Johanna Oenos, hark S.
 BIckford Walter A.
 Burt ( Itendall L.
 Jensen Computer Sciences Oept.
 ^tothelnatlcs Oept.
 Linguistics Oept.
, ^sic Oept.
 University of Wisconsin 1210 W.
 Oayton St.
 Madison, Wisconsin 53706 We present a model for human cognitive processing which assumes that a major component of the rules for calculating behavior are resident outside the individual, in the inherited, collective phenomena that anthropologists cal I 'culture.
' Our model contains rules of behavior encoded in propositionai structures such a frames or scripts, plus a method for calculating behavior by analogy.
 The propositionaI rules are transformed into situational state descriptions that are related by transformation operators which are also valid for transforming situations analogically.
 This kind of operator has been named, ' ApposI t ional Transformation Operator,' or ATO (Klein 1977).
 The term refers to a theory which posits that the division of labor between propositional and appositional modes of reasoning is culturally determined (Tentouten t feplan 1973; Paredes & Hepburn 1976, 1977).
 The ATO's described by Klein (1977) are derived from the 2valued, strong equivalence operator of mathematical logic, and from a 3valued variant.
 ATO's, mechanically derived from prepositional frame descriptions, can be used to calculate behavior by analogy, and in a way that evades many combinatorial problems associated with computation using propositional forms.
 Tasks of goal related planning can be handled in particularly efficient ways.
 The model represents a radical interpretation and extension of ideas of Claude LfcviStrauss (1962, 196471).
 We suggest that many of the ATO's in a given society are encoded in the material and symbolic artifacts of its culture.
 It is not necessary to assume that human processors compute behavior in significantly better ways than contemporary computer models.
 Rather, It is the collective, inherited cultural environment that supplies the information and constraints that make calculation of behavior a relatively simple task.
 We suggest that surrealistic imagery present in myth structures encodes ATO's that control social behavior.
 Surrealistic dream imagery encodes both collective and individual ATO's.
 The archetypes of Jung, supposedly resident in a collective unconscious, can be interpreted in this model as ATO's in the form of surrealistic, iconic imagery.
 This imagery emerges independently and in parallel among members of similar social groups as a consequence of their social interactions.
 ATO imagery Is both culturally inherited and spontaneously emergent: it aids in learning the rules of social structure, and emerges as epiphenomena in the minds of individuals as a consequence of the structure and rep«tltion in their everyday interactions.
 The imagery may shift with social change and the replacement of generations.
 This re i nterpretat ion of Jung limits similar archetypes to similar sociocultural groups, and makes unnecessary any genetic or metaphysical basis for the concept of 'collective unconscious.
' To explore the ATO thesis, we have constructed a computer simulation model of an artificial society, culture and universe a world derived from Edwin Abbott's 19thcentury fantasy.
 FLATLAND: A Romance of Many Dimensions (I38i«).
 The model is embedded in a new version of the Metasymbol ic Simulation System (Klein et al.
 1976.
 1977.
 1979; Appelbaum 1976) now Interpreted In PASCAL for the Terak and Apple microcomputers, and named, ' till! ,' (pronounced 'BAR BAR,' for short).
 Us have built a framedriven model that generates an opera, complete with textual, visual and musical output, all derived from the same semantic source.
 The rules are somewhat similar in form to those of Propp (1928) and are related to the type in Klein et al.
 (1976, 1977), plus an Improvement: we have now implemented Propp's concept of multimove tales (i.
e.
 the satisfaction of goals through the calculation of events in parallel).
 Our output is an opera entitled.
 REVOLT IN FLATUND: An Opera in ftw Dimensions, produced in the form of a videotape fKTe• n et al.
 1981).
 At each time increment during the generation of the opera, the complete state of the universe is recorded in a two or three dimensional, binary feature array.
 This encoding is a consequence of the implementation of the data structures in llftl (BAR BAR).
 We may calculate an ATO to relate any two such states.
 If we save the entire series of ATO's that relate the sequential states of the opera, we have the basis for generating a surrealistic version.
 To accomplish this we interpret the ATO's, not as operators, but as state descriptions of the universe (they are in exactly the same format as the state descriptions they relate).
 They may then be used, in original sequence, to generate text, visual imagery and music.
 It is our thesis that this multimedium encoding is a significant component of the material and symbolic artifacts of a culture.
 We suggest that what anthropologists call 'culture' serves as a repository for the analogical operators (ATO's) that make computation of behavior (rules of social structure) a feasible task for human automata.
 It is also possible to compute ATO's that relate ATO's.
 These, also, may be interpreted as state descriptions and used to generate a kind of surrealistic imagery in the form of text, visual images and music.
 At the highest levels, such ATO's can relate patterns behind the patterns that relate patterns of behavior; these ultimately relate all the domains of behavior possible in a society.
 Such ATO's may be encoded as myth systems, deities or as other forms of iconic imagery.
 Such a model provides a new level of mechanism for ideas of LtviStrauss (Klein et al.
 I98O).
 W» are currently working on a videotape performance of a surrealistic version of our opera, REVOLT IN FLATLAND.
 to accompany the original.
 The calculation of plots by proposItional reasoning is quite time consuming.
 The ATO's derived from a simulation generation can also be used to generate a new opera by analogy.
 All that is required is to specify a new set of initial conditions and the quantification of classes referenced by the ATO's.
 The derivation of a new opera that is an analogue of the old can take place with calculations no more complex than operations between feature arrays, carried out in chained sequence.
 The formal properties of ATO's permit calculation of successor and atecedant states.
 Accordingly, it is possible to plan by analogy.
 This kind of planning is not limited to goal states that are realistically attainable in the modelled universe.
 Because ATO's are analogic, one can calculate the hypothetical requirements to realize an unobtainable goal, via analogy with goal attainment sequences that are possible.
 The textual, visual and musical realization of our operas may also take a surrealistic or fantasy form if the starting conditions and hypothetical goal states that are specified are made very deviant from what is implied by the rules of primary simulation model.
 Ws are also working on the generation of analogical variants of the opera in which initial, intermediate and terminal states are specified that could not be 307 A loves no one, has no $, Is married to B.
 B loves A, has no $, Is married to A.
 C loves A, has $, Is unmarried.
 La Lb Lc $ Ha K> He A loves no one, has $, is married to C.
 B loves no one, has no $, and Is unmarried.
 C loves A, has $ — ^ ^ and Is married to A .
 '~^ La Lb Lc $ Ha t«) He A .
 0 0 0 .
 8 1 .
 0 0 1 C 1 0 .
 1 0 1 0 .
 0 0 .
 A B C • 0 1 0 • 0 0 0 • 1 0 1 • 0 1 0 • 0 1 0 • *zw • 0 1 1 • 1 1 1 • 0 i 1 • 0 0 0 • 1 0 1 • te^iM^ A B *(*XY)(*ZW) .
 0 1 1 • 1 1 1 • 0 1 ) • 1 0 1 .
 1 0 1 • "surrealistic" interpretation A loves B ( C, has no $, is married to B.
 B loves C, has $, and is married to A 6 C.
 C loves A & B, has $, and is married to B.
 If we then postulate a situation La lb U $ Ma »t) He P.
 A loves B fr C, has no $, and is unmarried.
 B loves A, has no $ and is unmarried.
 C loves A, has $ and is unmarried.
 we can compute its successor state by analogy with the combined results of X=^Y & Z=^W by solving ((X :: Y) :: (Z :: W)) :: (P :: ?), where 7 : A B C • \ \ \ .
 0 1 0 a 0 0 1 .
 0 0 0 .
 0 0 0 • *P(*(*XY)(*ZW)) A B C La .
 0 1 Lb 1 • 0 Lc 1 0 • $ fb 1 , 0 0 1 1 H> 0 • 0 ft 1 0 • p A loves B «• C, has $, and is married to C.
 B loves no one, has no $, and is unmarried, C loves A, has $ and is married to A.
 *(P(*(*XY)(*ZW)) Planning and Deviant Behavior If a sequence of events, A, B, C, D, occur, then *AC *B0 = patterns behind patterns behind events / \ / \ *AB *BC *CD = ATO patterns behind events / W \ / \ A B C D I event sequence If we wish to obtain a state E instead of 0, without changing any of the ATO's, we derive, by analogy, a sequence leading to E by replacing A, B, C, respectively, with *A(*OE) , *B(*OE), *C(*OE).
 If we wish to make a plan that specifies more than one goal state In the event sequence, we must alter some ATO's.
 We suggest that the meaning of 'culturally defined behavior' is that members of a society plan In a way that minimizes the level and number of ATO's affected.
 It follows that deviant behavior may be Interpreted as behavior that violates acceptable levels and numbers of ATO's.
 ATO patterns are part of the knowledge acquired by children.
 We posit that ATO patterns are encoded in multiple mediums of expression, both material and symbolic, and that they are the source of metaphor.
 It Is this encoding that gives form to a culture, and it Is this distributed presence in the environment that makes calculation of social behavior computationally feasible for the human mind.
 References Abbott, E, A.
 1884.
 FLATLAND: A Bomanee of hanv Dimensions, 2nd Ed,.
 London, TiSSai tew York: Dover.
) Appelbaum, M.
 A.
 1976.
 Metasynibol ic Simulation System (MESSY) User hantia].
 UW Comp Sci Tech Kept.
 272, I69pp.
 Klein, S.
 1977.
 Mhorf Transforms and a Computer Hsdel for Proposltional/Apposltional Reasoning.
 Presented at the Applied Mathematics Colloquium, Univ.
 of Bielefeld, Wbst Germany (Dec); at the Computer Science Colloquiuin, Uttv.
 of F^risOrsay (Dec); at a Joint Colloquium, Anthropology ( Computer Sciences Depts.
, Univ.
 of CaliforniaIrvine (1978, March).
 Klein, S.
, J.
 F.
 Aeschi imann, M.
 A.
 Appelbaum, D.
 F.
 Balsiger, E.
J.
 Curtis, M.
 Foster, S.
 D.
 Kalish, S.
J.
 Kamin, Y.
 0.
 lee, L.
A.
 Price.
 1976.
 Simulation d'hypotheses imises par Propp et LfcviStrauss en utilisant un systeme de simulation metasymbol ique.
 Informatioue et Sciences Humalnes.
 tto.
 28, pp.
 63133.
 .
 1977.
 Madellinq Propp t LAviStrauss in a Metasymbolic Simulation System.
 In Patterns in Oral literature.
 H.
 Jason t D.
 Segal, eds.
, The Hague :Mouton.
.
 Klein, S.
 , D.
 F.
 Aeschi imann, D.
 F.
 Balsiger, S.
 L.
 Converse, C.
 Court, M.
 Foster, R.
 Lao, J.
 D.
 Cbkley t J.
 Smith.
 1979.
 AUTOMATIC NOVEL WRITING: A Status Report.
 In Text Processinq/Textverarbei tunq.
 W.
 Burghardt ( K.
 Hdlker, eds.
, pp.
 338412, Berlin: de Gruyter.
 Klein, S.
, O.
S.
 Kaufer, t C.
 N.
 Mauwirth.
 1980.
 The Locus of tfetaphor In Framedriven Text Granmars.
 In The Sixth UCUS Forum 1979.
 W.
 C.
 McCormack t H.
 J.
 Izzo, eds, pp.
 5367, Columbia, S.
C .
 ttjrnbeam Press.
 Klein, S.
, 0.
 A.
 Ross, H.
S.
 Hanasse, J.
 Danos, M.
 S.
 Bickford, W,A.
 Burt t K.
L.
 Jensen.
 1981.
 REVOLT IN FLATUNO: An Opera In 2Dlmensions.
 Presented at the 5th Int.
 Conf.
 on Computers t the Humanities, May 1719, Ann Arbor.
 LfcvlStrauss, C.
 1962.
 La Penste sauvaqe.
 Paris: Plon.
 (English: 1966.
 The Savage Hind.
 New York: Basic Books.
) 1964, 1966, 1968, 1971.
 hVthologlQues.
 Vols.
 IIV, Paris: Plon.
 (English: 1969, 1973, 1978, 1979, Introduction to a Science of M/thology.
 Vols.
 IIV, New York: Basic Books.
) Paredes, J.
A.
 t M.
 J.
 Hepburn.
 1976.
 The Split Brain and the Cul tureandCognition F^radox.
 Current Anthropology 17:121127.
 (Discussion, 17:318326, 503511, 738742; 1977.
 18:344350.
) Propp, V.
 1928.
 Marfoloqlia skazkl.
 Leningrad.
 (English: 1968.
 Hjrphologv of the Folktale.
 2nd ed.
, Austin: Univ.
 of Texas Press.
> TenHduten, W.
0.
 t CD.
 Kaplan.
 1973.
 Science and It's Mirror Image.
 New York: Ifarper ( Row.
 308 derived from the propositional rules, but which could be obtained by hypothetical analogy.
 Arc's  Apposltlonal Transforation Operators ATCs relate situational descriptions In the form of feature arrays.
 A 2valued version, essentially, is the strong equivalence operator of mathematical logic.
 If the Interpretation of I and 0 are reversed, the operator Is equivalent to noncarry, binary addition.
 The ATO is actually an array of bit operators defined as follows: * a b 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 where '' means 'does not apply,' making this specification 2valued, with some augmentation.
 The operator has the following properties: *ab = "ATO' a b *ab = •*ba *a(<&b)= b *b(*ab) a e.
g.
 110 oil I.
I •̂  ^ ni 1 < \ 0 1 1 •n / 100 ^b °°  010 000  "ATO" 0.
1 •it 0 "1 .
 .
6 0 1 C .
0 • 1 o' 1 • .
0 • .
0 t 1 0 .
0 • .
0 u • A 3valued variant is useful for state transitions where events emerge that were not present in the initial state.
 One can represent this with the 2valued ATO, but the 3valued variant is also useful.
 Again, a reversal of the interpretation of I fr 0 yieldn an Implementation as noncarry addi t ion.
 Examples of ATO's In Analogical Inference Consider, first, some simple verbal analogies.
 A feature array referencing 'male,' 'female,' 'young,' 'adult,' 'love,' 'hate,' 'light,' 'dark,' is sufficient to formulate the following analogy: X = Boy loves 1 ight .
.
 I Girl hates dark Y : Woman hates light" ? M F Y A L H Lt Dk ^f,^^^ „  ^,g^ p .
 fe^^ie, Y : young, A = adult, L : love, H : hate, Lt : light, Dk = dark X : 10101010 .
.
 Z : 01100101 *XY : 00000011 Y = 01010110 ? 7 : *Z(*XY)= 10011001 : ften loves dark another example: X = Man hates dark .
.
 Z : Boy hates light Y : Ubman loves 1ight ? X : 10010101 .
.
 z I 10100110 ^„„ „„,.
««„« :: «XY : 00110000 Y = 01011010 ? 7 = *Z(*XY): OIIOIOOl : Girl loves dark' The same method can be applied to visual analogies.
 For example, if the following set of visual features is used to create a pictorial analogy, the answer can be calculated using ATO's: m f\\0 D u 0 0 X r Y : X = lOIOIOlO .
.
 Z = 0I010I0I Y : 0II00I10 '" 7 7 : *Z(*XY) : 10011001 =: 'XY = 00110011 ^ A visual Interpretation of *XY might yie H Q If we give natural language Interpretations to these visual features, such as, iiii n 0 • '^ ^ ''"' • " male female young adult loves hates light dark (OO) : Boy loves light r\ A ^^xwn hates dark "iŝn z Girl hates light ATO : *XY : m i = Han loves dark sexless being, both old and young; indifferent to 1Ight and dark.
 Complex analogies may also be computed, e.
g.
.
 If ((X :: Y) :: (z:: W)) :: (P :: 7) then 7 : *P(*(XY)(*ZW)).
 Consider a complex example: X Y A loves B, has no $, Is married to B.
 B loves A, has no $, is married to A.
 C loves no one, has $ and Is unmarried.
 A loves B, has no $, and is not married.
 B loves A, has no $, and is not married.
 C loves no one, has $ and is unmarried.
 V*iere La : 'loves A,' etc.
, $  'has money,' and (te : 'married to A,' etc.
, the X Y states may be represented as follows: La Li? Lc $ Ma Ma Mc La Lb Lc $ Ma * f̂c A B C .
 1 0 1 • 0 0 0 .
 0 0 1 • 0 0 0 .
 0 0 0 • A B C .
 1 0 1 .
 0 0 0 • 0 0 1 .
 1 0 1 • 0 0 0 • .
 1 1 .
 1 1 *XY 1 1 .
 1 1 0 .
 1 1 0 i 1 1 • If we depict 'loves' as a nose pointing at the beloved (in between, if two loves), and if a noseless state means 'loves no one,' and if holding hands depicts 'married to,' and if a ' $' indicates, 'has money,'.
 n 309 LEARNING WITH UNDERSTANDING James G.
 Creeno University of Pittsburgh This paper Is concerned with meaningful learning.
 Psychologists have distinguished between meaningful and rote learning (e.
g.
, Katona, 19'tO; Werthelmer, 1945/1959) largely by providing examples that contrast the two phenomena.
 The work reported In this paper Is an attempt to develop a more explicit and detailed theoretical analysis of the nature of learning that occurs with understanding.
 1 will consider learning situations In which new procedures and concepts are acquired for solving problems.
 Systems for learning procedures that have been analyzed previously are of two general kinds that 1 will call (1) direct learning and (2) analogical learning.
 1 will describe a third kind of learning system in this paper that I call schematic learning.
 In direct learning, examples are presented that show performance of the procedures that the learner Is to acquire.
 Anderson et al (In press), Neves (1981), and Vere (1978) have studied processes of acquiring procedures that match the actions shown in examples or written theorems that correspond to inferential procedures.
 Processes in which fragments of procedures become integrated, forming new procedural concepts, also have been studied (Anzal & Simon, 1979; Larkln, in press; Neves & Anderson, in press), as have processes In which existing procedures are corrected, extended, or refined (Brown & VanLehn, in press; Goldstein, 1974; Neches, 1981; Sussman, 1975).
 In analogical learning, a new procedure Is acquired by mapping components of a known procedure to a new domain (Rumelhart & Norman, io press).
 The procedures that are transfered constitute new concepts that can be used to represent situations in the new domain.
 In schematic learning, new procedures and concepts are formed in the framework of a general conceptual structure.
 A schema can provide a framework either for learning from examples or for analogical learning.
 I will discuss two examples that have been worked out in the form of runoiag computational models that simulate salient aspects of student subjects' learning and performance.
 The first example involves learning to solve proof problems in geometry.
 This illustrates the role of a schema in learning from examples.
 The second example, which Illustrates the role of a schema in analogical learning.
 Involves learning procedures for multldlgit subtraction in arlthnetic.
 Learning from an Example Proof My first example is learning from the solution of a simple proof problem that is given early In a highBchool geometry course.
 The problem and its solution are in Figure 1.
 I will discuss learning that can occur on the basis of this example problem, but first consider the problem in Figure 2, a problem that Wertheimer (1945/1959) discussed.
 Note that the solutions of these two problems are very similar in form.
 Three steps in Figure 2 correspond to the third step in Figure I, but otherwise there is a simple mapping between the two solution proofs.
 It might be expected that anyone who has learned to solve the problem in Figure 1 would also be able to solve Figure 2.
 It turns out that there is considerable variation in the success different students have with Figure 2 when it la presented as a transfer problem.
 A set of protocols on the problem in Figure 2 was obtained from students who had completed study of proof problems about line segments, such as Figure 1, and had begun to study properties of angles.
 Some students had no Idea how to proceed.
 Others solved Figure 2 easily, and one even complained about having to solve "the same problem" so many times.
 Consider the question: What enables a student to apply the knowledge acquired for solving Figure 1 to find a solution to Figure 2 easily? One hypothesis is that the procedures learned for solving Figure 1 were associated with general concepts that can be applied when Figure 2 is encountered.
 A version of this hypothesis has been Implemented in a simulation program (see Anderson et al, in press, for a more detailed description).
 The general structure that I postulate as the basis of transfer is a schema called Overlap/Whole/Parts.
 In this schema there are two components called "wholea," each of which is divided into parts, and a part of one whole is Identical to a part of the other.
 1 assume that in meaningful learning based on Figure 1, the Overlap/Whole/Parts schema is formed.
 Overlap/Whole/Parts has two subschemata, the Whole/Part structures that are included In the pattern.
 It is reasonable to assume that ninthgrade students have understood relationships of parts that form whole quantities for several years, and that they have some procedures associated with that schema.
 For example, they can add numbers associated with subsets to find the number in a superset, or subtract one part from the whole to form the other part.
 The Overlap/Whole/Parts schema is formed as a combination of two Whole/Parts schemata, constrained so that a part of each "whole" component is shared with the other.
 Procedures that are attached to Whole/Parts are available in situations where the more complex structure is applied.
 In addition, some new procedures are also acquired and associated with the Overlap/Whole/Parts schema.
 For example, when the wholecomponents of the two substructures are equal, this enables the inference that the sums of their parts are equal, and when these sums are equal, the unshared parts are equal.
 (Learning of these procedures is based on Steps 4 and 5 in Figure 1.
) Two characteristics of the acquired knowledge are significant.
 First, the procedures that are acquired are defined on the components of the problem representations, which are the schematized versions of problems.
 This makes the procedural knowledge transferrable to other situations where the same schemata can be applied—for example, to problems such as Figure 2, if the system can learn to represent adjacent angles with the Whole/Parts schema.
 The second significant feature is that new conceptual entities are acquired when the schema of Figure 3 la learned.
 The organized structures of the wholeswlthparts are arguments of the new procedures, and thus function as cognitive units as a result of the learning that occurs.
 Learning Subtraction Analogically My second example Involves the role of a schema in learning that is based on an analogy.
 This research has been done in collaboration with Lauren Resnlck, who presents « companion paper in these proceedings.
 In our research, the learner does not construct the analogical mapping, as in the system that Rumelhart and Norman (in press) studied.
 Rather, the mapping between domains is presented in detail by an Instructor.
 Performance of students indicates that this instruction leads to understanding of the procedure, and we consider the questions of what knowledge is acquired that constitutes this understanding and of how the 310 acquisition occurs.
 The procedure that we have studied in this research is arithmetic subtraction.
 Children who were chosen to participate In the research had one of the subtraction "bugs" Identified by Brown and Burton (1978).
 Examples of performance that Involves bugs are In Figure 3.
 The first problem Illustrates a •smallerfromlarger" bug, where the student subtracts the smaller digit from the larger one In each column.
 Ignoring which Is on top.
 The second and third problems Illustrate a "don'tdecrementzero" bug, where borrowing from a zero does not include decrementing another number to its left or a change in the value of the zero digit.
 The Instruction that Is given uses a procedure for subtracting with blocks.
 Different sizes of blocks represent different place values: small cubes for units, long (1 x 10) sticks for tens, flat (10 » 10) pieces for hundreds, and so on.
 Instruction occurs In three stages.
 First, <• procedure is taught for subtracting with blocks.
 Second, there Is a detailed mapping of that procedure to the procedure of subtracting with written numerals.
 Finally, the written procedure is made Independent of the blocks.
 The critical phase Is In Step 2, where the correspondence between the procedures with the blocks and with the written numerals is made explicit.
 Each action In the blocks domain corresponds to an action in the written domain.
 For example, when a child removes a "tens"block during a trade, the digit In that column is decremented by one, and when ten 'ones'blocks are added to the display, a small "one" Is placed In the units column.
 Indicating that ten has been added to that digit.
 This instruction can be considered as presentation of a componentbycomponent mapping between twc procedures.
 This instruction has been successful li changing children's performance, a form of debugging.
 Furthermore, children give us evidence that they have achieved significant understanding of arithmetic concepts and principles.
 One example was given by a student who had suffered from thi smallerfromlarger bug.
 After instruction, thli student was asked how the new procedure dlfferec from the one the student used earlier.
 The student said, "1 used to take the numbers apart; now leave them together, .
.
.
 and take them apart.
" Wi think that this shows that the student had achlevei an understanding that the digits in one of the rowi of the problem represent parts of a whole entity that Is, that together they represent a number.
 A second example was given by a student who had a don'tdecrementzero bug.
 After doing the problem: 403  275 correctly, including manipulations with blocks, the student was asked, "Do you know where the nine came from?" The student said, "It'o nine tens, and the other ten is right here," and pointed to the small 1 that was written to the left of the 3 in the top number of the problem.
 We think that this shows that the student understood the principle of conservation Involved in borrowing, that the numerals resulting from the borrowing procedure represent a quantity equal in value to reductions In another numeral.
 Now consider the theoretical question: what knowledge is acquired in the Instruction? Hypotheses about acquired knowledge should provide an explanation of the correct performance that results, as well as the evidence that students provide that they have achieved significant understanding.
 We will present two hypotheses.
 The simpler one uses an idea of schematic goals.
 The other hypothesis postulates that understanding of subtraction Involves the Whole/Parts schema, the same structure to which we attribute understanding of the geometry problem considered above.
 The latter hypothesis has been implemented as a running program; the former Is based on a suggestion by Robert Neches.
 The hypothesis of schematic goals postulates that knowledge of the blocks procedure is organized in a way similar to Sacerdotl's (1977) system of hierarchical action knowledge, with higherorder actions providing a goalbased organization of lowerlevel actions In the procedure.
 Important goals for the blocks procedure Include: (1) find an answer for each column; (2) If there are not enought blocks for a column, get some more; (3) If there are no blocks in a column where you need to get some more, get some blocks for that column.
 In the hypothesis of schematic goals, we assume that mapping instruction results In transferring the goals of the blocks procedure to the procedure with written numerals.
 We propose that these goals correspond to new cognitive units In the student'" representation of subtraction with written numerals.
 This organization can explain indications of understanding like those we presented earlier.
 The remark that the correct procedure "keeps the numbers together" is explained because the actions of DecrementTop and AddTen are parts of the same general action.
 Similarly, the elementary actions Decrement, Makenine, and Addten are combined to form a larger structure, which could be the basis of the remark that "It's nine tens, and the other ten is right here.
" The simulation that we have programmed is somewhat more complex than the hypothesis of schematic goals.
 Our reasons for Implementing a more complex system were In protocols obtained as students learned about the procedures in he blocks domain.
 Instruction for this procedure Involved a kind of discovery method, including questions such as, "Can you think of a way to get more blocks? " The student whose performance we tried to simulate showed several Indications of understanding principles underlying the procedure without being shown the procedure.
 At one critical point, involving borrowing through zero, the student said "Ooh neat—Now 1 get it.
" We simulated the student's performance with a model In which adjacent digits are schematized as parts of a whole unit.
 Understanding of the partandwhole relationship of adjacent digits enables the model to understanding borrowing through zero by coordinating a constraint of keeping a total quantity constant while adjusting the numbers of things in Its parts.
 This is described In more detail in Resnlck's companion paper.
 References Anderson, J.
 R.
, Greeno, J.
 G.
, Kline, P.
 J.
, & Neves, D.
 M.
 Acquisition of problemsolving skill.
 In J.
 R.
 Anderson (Ed.
), Cognitive skills and their acquisition.
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
: Lawrence Erlbaum, in press.
 Anzal, Y.
, & Simon, H.
 A.
 The theory of learning by doing.
 Psychological Review, 1979, 86, 124140.
 Brown, J.
 S.
, & Burton, R.
 R.
 Diagnostic models for procedural bugs in basic mathematical skills.
 Cognitive Science.
 1978, 2, 155192.
 Brown, J.
 S.
, & VanLehn, K.
 Toward a generative theory of "bugs.
" Cognitive Science, in press.
 311 Goldstein, I.
 P.
 Understanding simple picture programs.
 (Artificial Intelligence Laboratory Report TR294).
 Cambridge, Mass.
: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 197A.
 Katona, G.
 Organizing and memorizing.
 York: Columbia University Press, 1940.
 New Larkln, J.
 H.
 Enriching formal knowledge: A model for learning to solve textbook physics problems.
 In J.
 R.
 Anderson (Ed.
), Cognitive skills and their acquisition.
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
: Lawrence Erlbaun, in press.
 Neches, R.
 Models of heuristic procedure modification.
 Unpublished doctoral dissertation, CarnegieMellon University, 1981.
 Neves, D.
 M.
 Learning procedures from examples.
 Unpublished doctoral dissertation, CarnegieMellon University, 1981.
 Neves, D.
 M.
, & Anderson, J.
 R.
 Becoming expert at a cognitive skill.
 In J.
 R.
 Anderson (Ed.
), Cognitive skills and their acquisition.
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
: Lawrence Erlbaum, in press.
 Rumelhart, D.
 E.
, & Norman, D.
 A.
 Analogical processes In learning.
 In J.
 R.
 Anderson (Ed.
), Cognitive skills and their acquisition.
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
: Lawrence Erlbaum, In press.
 Sacerdotl, E.
 D.
 A structure for plans and behavior.
 New York: ElsevlerNorth Holland Publishing Co.
, 1977.
 Sussman, G.
 J.
 A computer model of skill acquisition.
 New York: ElsevlerNorth Holland Publishing Co.
, 1975.
 Vere, S.
 A.
 Inductive learning of relational productions.
 In D.
 A.
 Waterman & F.
 HayesRoth (Eds.
), Patterndirected Inference systems.
 New York: Academic Press, 1978.
 Werthelmer, M.
 Productive thinking.
 New York: Harper & Row, 1945.
 (Enlarged edition, 1959) Statement 1.
 /AOC  /AOD • /COD 2.
 /IBOD .
 /AOB • /AOD 3.
 /AOC = 180°  4.
 /BOD 180°  5.
 /AOC /^BOD 6.
 /AOD + /COD = /AOB + /AOD 7.
 /COD = /AOB Given: AOC, BOD Provet /AOB  /COD Re Hon 1.
 angle addition 2.
 angle addition 3.
 def, of straight / i.
 def, of straight / S.
 substitution 6, substitution 7, subtraction 2 6 3 Figure 2 3 2 7 1 8 4 5 0 '2 3 0 6 y '0 '5 " 2 3 9 2 0 6 Figure 3 4 7 6 Given: RN = oy Prove:: RO = NY Statement 1.
 M RO + ON 2.
 OY = ON + NT 3.
 RN OY 4.
 RO * ON = ON + NY 5.
 RO = NY Reason 1, segnent addition 2, segment addition 3.
 given 4, substitution 5, subtraction property rifur* 1 312 The Growth of Nunber Representation; Successive Levels of Scheaatlc Learning Lauren B.
 Resnlck University of Pittsburgh In a companion paper*.
 Greeno has outlined a theory of learning as the successive construction of new schemata.
 In this paper we explore the effects of cumulating schemata on performance and competence in the domain of number knowledge.
 We begin with a brief consideration of the number representation assumed to be available to children before they have learned place value and decimal notation.
 Then we outline several stages in tlie acquisition of decimal placevalue knowledge.
 Finally, we consider the implications of successive stages of number representation for a theory of the understanding of cardinalityEarly Number Representation Varied d.
Ttabases on early counting abilities (Gelraan & Gallistel, 1978; Fuson, in press), simple mental arithmetic (e.
g.
, Groen & Resciick, 1977), and story problem solution (Vcrgnaud, in press; Carpenter & Moser, in press; Nesher, in press) have provided the basis for formal models of preschool and early school mathematical performances (e.
g.
, Riley, Greeno, i Heller, 1978; Greeno, Gelman, & Riley, 1978; Briars & Larkln, 1981).
 These models converge on the following features of predectmal number representation: 1.
 Children possess an ordered string of "count words", linked by "next" and "backward next" relationships.
 Each position in the string has come to stand for a quantity.
 The string can be used to solve problems via counting.
 It can also be used as an analog representation of quantity.
 For example, the positions of two target quantities c.
nn bo found ;ind compnri'cl for relative "largfMcss ' (Sckulcr & Hlcrklewicz, 1977).
 constr.
iint that the combined parts ncltlior exceed nor fall short of the wliolc quantity.
 The schema h.
is been shown to function in successful solution' of certain story problems (e.
g.
, tliose with the unknown in the first position) that younger chlldrin find very difficult.
 It seems likely that the schem.
i also permits children to discover tlic complementarity of addition and subtraction, lending to a particularly officientand nathem.
Tt ically elegant — solution to subtraction problems.
 in this procedure, which Ii.
ts been observed in cluldren as young as 7 years (Woods, Kesnick, & Groen, 1975; Svenson & lledenborg, 1979), children either count up from the smaller number or count down from the larger, whiciiever requires [ewer counts.
 Ai CHI t:.
 itj on of l*l.
'U'cV.
i I no Sf hrin.
i I ;\ In the courio of liarniiig the decimal number system, the string of count words is Rr.
iduaUy reorg.
ini red to rcfloct an understand inp, that mulLidlc.
it numbers ire composilions of units and tens (later .
i 1 so hundreds, thousands, e t c .
 ) .
 This is arcompi i sited tlirough successive o 1 ibnrat ions of the Part/Whole schema.
 Several stages in tiie acquisition of tliis compositional Interpretation of mviltldiglt numbers can be identified in a program (MOI.
I.
Y) that simulates tlie performances of a 9yearr>ld girl (Molly) as slie acquirird new knowledKO llirou(',li special remedial instruction In multidigit subtraction.
 Four Bt.
ices in NOLLY'S knowledge of place value can be distinguished: St.
I go \^^ Unique part i t loning of muU id i j;i t numbiTS.
 At tiie earliest stage of placevalue knowledge, MOLLY has a knowledge structure which organizes conventional information about the structure of multidigit written numbers (Flgurr 2 ) .
 2.
 Children can Interpret smill numbers in terms of a I'art/Wliole schema (Figure 1) such tliat any number ran be lnter|)reted either as i whole composed of two smaller numbers or as a part in a larger whole.
 The Part/Whole schema includes the ART/WHOLI W)>'>>.
 ( T T ^ 1 iliUl I I *Grceno, J.
 G.
 Meaningful learning.
 Paper presented at the meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Berkeley, CA, August 1981.
 c ^ Vv^C^fj "̂ rr̂  cii:j c3> liKUic' 2 This structure Identifies columns according to their positional relationship to each other (thus the centrallty of the Next relationship).
 Attached to each column is a block shape (these refer to the shapes of blocks used in teaching base arithmetic), a counting string, a value, a column name, etc.
 Using the Next structure, MOLLY can: 1.
 construct a block display for any written number.
 This is done by Identifying whlcli column the number Is in, finding the block shape that match that column, and displaying the number of blocks specified by the digit In the column.
 2.
 "read" a block display.
 This is done by starting with the largest block shape, finding the counting string that matches It, enumerating the blocks using the appropriate string, and then iterating through successively smaller block shapes.
 313 3.
 Interpret a written hundreds, y tens, and z ones.
" numeral as 4.
 compare block displays on the basis of the hlghest«alued block only (e.
g.
, for 3A7 v.
 73A, compare only the hundreds blocks).
 As long as the Next structure alone Is used to Interpret numbers, each written number can have only one block representation—a "canonical" representation, with no more than 9 blocks per column.
 This means that there Is no basis for a semantic interpretation of the operations of carrying and borrowing.
 The next stage provides the earliest basis for this interpretation.
 Stage 2: Multiple partltlonlngs arrived at empirically.
 At this stage the Part/Whole schema is elaborated to Include a special restriction, applied to twodigit numbers, that one of the parts be a multiple of 10.
 Application of Part/Whole permits multiple partitionlngs, and therefore multiple block representations, for any written number.
 Any specific partitions, however, must be arrived at through a counting solution.
 For example, to show A7 with more ones," MOLLY first applies Part/Whole In a global fashion and then concludes that If the whole Is to stay the same but more ones are to be shown, there must be fewer tens.
 It therefore reduces the tens by a single block.
 The schema is next Instantiated with 47 in the Whole slot, and 30 in one of the Parts.
 The remaining Part is found by adding ones blocks and counting up until 47 is reached.
 Two important concepts liave been added to the number representation at this stage.
 First, the equivalence of several partitionlngs has been recognized.
 Second, the possibility of having more than 9 of a particular block size has been admitted.
 This is crucial for understanding "borrowing", where—temporarily—more than 9 of a given denomination must bo understood to be present, without changing the total value of the quantity.
 Interviews with a number of children in addition to Molly make it clear that there is a stage in which the possibility of borrowing or trading to get more blocks is rejected because It will produce an "illegal" (I.
e.
, noncanonlcaI) display.
 The schema specifics that there is a "from" pile of blocks, from which blocks are removed.
 This pile becomes smaller by one block.
 There is also an "into" pile of blocks that becomes larger by 10 blocks.
 The value of the blocks in the "from' and "into" piles is establislied by multiplying the number of blocks removed by the value of the block shape (as specified In the Next structure).
 Thus, when trades are made between adjacent block sizes, the schema specifics that both the "into" and the "from" values will be 10.
 Applied as an elaboration of the Part/Whole schema, the Trade schema allows MOLLY to conclude—without having to count up—that there lias been no change In the whole quantity.
 Stage 4: Application to written addition and subtraction.
 MOLLY also provides a theory of how the various levels of quantity representation discusser' above can come to be applied to written numerals.
 MOLLY simulates the learning sequence acliieved as a result of Instruction that forced attention to the details of a mapping between the operations of written borrowing and those of block trading (Resnlck, In press).
 Figure 4 shows the result of constructng this mental mapping: an abstraction that treats the two procedures as expressions of the same exchange principles, with analogous elements in the Trade and Dorrow schemata.
 Evidence for this level of understanding CS5 C^'D C23? I i pi re 4 Stage 3: Preservation of quantity by exchanges that maintain equivalence.
 A further elaboration of Part/Whole appears at Stage 3, when MOLLY adds to Its representation for multtdlglt numbers an explicit lOfor1 relationship for adjacent block sizes.
 This knowledge Is represented by a Trade schema (Figure 3) which specifies a class of legal exchanges among blocks.
 TRAO€ ^fom bloĉ O ^Smatler^ ot nimibfr romes from Ihr follouinj; kinds of perfoiiti.
inces, observed both in Molly and in a number of other children whom wc have interviewed: 1.
 When asked to st.
itc tile value of carry and borrow mirks, the child states the value according to the column rather than simply naming the digit.
 Thus the I at a In Figure 5 is said to be worth 10 (not 1 ) , and the I at b is said to be worth 100.
 0 i,i.
 4 / ^ I ^ Q I'iHure 3 1 (i 8 7 5 1'inn re fj y / /, 2 H I li fi 3 f) ;) 7 314 2.
 Wlicn askod to show llic blocks lli.
il repri'sont n given cnrry or borrow ra.
irk, ilw rlilld selects blocks nccordlnc to value.
 A Itnbloik 11 selected for a, a hundredblock for b, .
iiid '•" fortli.
 ~ 3.
 riie clil Id r.
in construct ju";c t f i< il ions for llio various mark! nj.
s in urillrn suhtr.
nllon.
 Kor example, Holly cxplalncil that in the subtnclion problem shô /n in Fip.
nre h above, she hul bi)rrowod one Ihuusand from the 7.
 Whi'n asked uheri' she had put tin? thousand, she was puzzled at first , bi'c.
nise there is no place wliere one can "s<'c" 1UOO in the mirkinc.
s slven.
 However, she then said, "It is divided up.
 Nine hundred of it Is here ( i nd i cat I nc, ttu hurtrlreds roluinn), and the other hundred is lure ( ind ie.
ii inf.
 the tens and the o m s loluinns toRelher).
 Yon see, tills 9 Is really 90 and this 1 is really 10 and that adds up to lOO!" MOLLY Is able to construct this explanation by first calling on the Exchange (Borrow) schema, which specifies that If a quantity of 1000 has been taken from a column It must be put into another column.
 Unable to find a column with 1000 put Into it, MOLLY calls on the Part/Whole schema, sots the Whole slot equal to 1000 and looks for two Parts that add up to 1000.
 It finds 900, but cannot find a column with the 100 necessary for completing the Wliole.
 MOLLY Iterates through the Part/Whole schema again, this time setting the Whole equal to 100 and now finding 90 and 10 as the Parts.
 ^ An Interpretation of Cardinality This characterization of children's developing number knowledge permits us to give a more precise psychological meaning to the understanding of "cardinality" than has heretofore been possible.
 Celman and Callistel (1978) Included In their principles of counting a cardinality principle, which specifies that the final count word reached when a set of objects is being enumerated is the total number in the set—i.
e.
, the sot's cardinality.
 For the preschool child, who has not yet come to interpret quantity in terms of the Part/Whole schema, this is the only meaning of cardinality available.
 This criterion of understanding cardinality has been criticized, however, (e.
g.
, Comiti, 1980) as too weak, and In particular as not reflecting the Piagetlan definition of cardinality.
 We can now see that a higher stage of cardinality understanding can be recognized in the child's subsequent application of the Part/Whole schema to number.
 In applying this schema, the child understands that a total (whole) quantity remains the same even under variant partltlonings.
 The meaning of cardinality is further elaborated when the placevalue schemata outlined here are acquired.
 At Stage 2, when the Part/Whole schema with the multipleof10 restriction is first applied to twodigit numbers, the amount represented by the number is now subject to multiple partitionlngs without a change in quantity.
 This is exactly parallel to the new understanding of cardinality tor smaller numbers that was achieved when the Part/Whole schema was applied to them.
 Without application of the Part/Whole schema the cardinality of a number resides In the specific display set and the number attached to it through legal counting procedures.
 With Part/Whole, cardinality resides in the total quantity, no matter how it is displayed or partItlonedThe Trade stage of multldigit number representation represents yet a higher level of luiderstandlng of cardinality.
 Now it is recognized that cardinality is not altered by a specified set of legal exchanges.
 An analogy can be drawn with an earlier recognition of quantity as unchanged under various physical transformations (such as spreading out a display of objects— the classic Piagetlan test of conservation).
 However, the transformations produced under control of the Trade schema do in fact Involve a change In the actual number of objects present.
 Thus, recognition that the value of the total quantity remains unchanged requires a level of abstraction concerning the nature of cardinality that was not required for earlier stages of understanding.
 References Briars, D.
 J.
, & Larkin, J.
 H.
 An Integrated model of skill in solving elementary word problems.
 Unpublished manuscript, CarnegieMellon University, 1981.
 Carpenter, T.
, & Moser, J.
 The development of addition and subtraction problem solving skills.
 In T.
 Carpenter, J.
 Moser, (.
 T.
 Romberg (Eds.
) Addition and subtract Ion: A developmental perspective, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaura Associates, in press.
 Comltl, C.
 Le concept de nombre chez 1'enfant • Communication presented at the Quatrieme Congres International sur 1' Enseignoraent des Mathematlques, Berkeley, CA, August 1980.
 Fuson, K.
 An analysis of the countlngon solution procedure In addition.
 In T.
 Romberg, T.
 Carpenter, & J.
 Moser (Eds.
) Addi tion and subtraction: A developmental perspect i ve.
 Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaura Associates, In press.
 Gelman, R.
, & Callstel, C.
 R.
 The child's understanding of number.
 Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1978.
 Greeno, J.
 G.
 Gelman, R.
 & Riley, M.
 Young children's count ing and understanding.
 Paper presented at the ainiual meeting of the Psychonoraic Society, San Antonio, TX, November 1978.
 Groen, G.
 J.
, & Resnlck, L.
 B.
 Can preschool children invent addition algorithms? Journal of Educational Psychology, 1977, 69̂ , 645652.
 Nesher, P.
 Levels of description in the analysis of addition and subtraction word problems.
 In T.
 Carpenter, J.
 Moser, & T.
 Romberg (Eds.
) Addition and subtraction: A developmental perspective.
 Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, in press.
 Resnlck, L.
 B.
 Syntax and semantics In learning to subtract.
 In T.
 Carpenter, J.
 Moser, & T.
 Romberg (Eds.
), Addition and subtraction: A developmental perspectIve.
 Hlllsdaio, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, in press.
 Riley, M.
 S.
, Greeno, J.
 G.
, & llell.
r.
 J.
 I.
 Development of children's problemsolving ability in arithmetic.
 In II.
 P.
 Ginsburg, (Ed.
), The development of ma thcmatleal thinking.
 New York: Academic Truss, In press • Sekuler, R.
, & Mlerkiewlcz, I).
 Children's judgments of numerical Inequality.
 Chi Id Development.
 1977 48^, 630633.
 Svenson, C, & Hedenborg, M.
 L.
 Strategies used by children when solving simple subtractions.
 Acta Psychology.
 1979 43, 113.
 315 Vergnaud, G.
 A classification of cognitive tasks and operations of thought involved In addition and subtraction problems.
 In T.
 Carpenter, J.
 Moser, & T.
 Romberg (Eds.
), Addition and subtraction: A developmental perspective.
 Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, In press.
 Woods, S.
, Resnlck, L.
 B.
, & Groen, G.
 J.
 An experimental test of five process models for subtraction.
 Journal of Educational Psychology.
 67^(1), 1721.
 316 The Role of Experiences and Examples in Learning Systems Edwina L.
 Rissland+ Oliver G.
 Selfridge Elliot M.
 Soloway* Department of Computer and Information Science University of Massachusetts Amherst, MA 01003 Abstract In this paper, we discuss the role of experiences and examples in learning systems.
 We discuss these issues in the context of three systems in particular: Rissland and Soloway's Constrained Example Generation (CEG) System, Selfridge's COUNT, and Soloway's BASEBALL.
 1.
 Introduction Examples and experiences, by which we mean concrete instances, situations or problems, are critical to any system, man or machine, that learns.
 Examples provide the basis from which generalizations, concepts and conjectures are made.
 They also provide the criticisms needed to refute and refine.
 For instance, in Winston's learning program [Winston 1975], examples of the concept to be learned, e.
g.
, an arch, and nonexamples, e.
g.
, "near misses", are the critical input from which his program builds a structural description of a concept.
 In Lenat's concept discovery program, AM, [Lenat 1977], examples help direct the discovery process, by providing evidence of the reasonableness and interestingness of new concepts.
 ^Supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grant IST8017343.
 "Supported in part by the Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences under ARI grant MDA90380C0508.
 Opinions expressed in this report are those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the U.
S.
 Government.
 Examples are critical in human learning and discovery, whether it be in children [Hawkins 1980] or sophisticated adults.
 Lakatos [1976] gives a detailed exposition of the historically important Euler's formula; there, examples like various "monsters" (i.
e.
, counterexamples) play a central role in concept refinement.
 Thus, examples are grist for the learning process in a critical way.
 In this paper, we consider the role of exanples in learning systems, in particular issues such as the richness of the base of examples upon which the system runs.
 Questions about the generation of examples are discussed in [Rissland 1980, Rissland and Soloway 1980, 1981].
 2.
 Three Learning Systems We now restrict our discussion to three learning systems to illustrate some general issues in learning.
 Briefly, the three systems work as follows: 1.
 BASEBALL possesses both high level schemas which describe the intentions of people in actionoriented competitive games and low level schemas which provide a common sense understanding of spatiotemporal events.
 From observations of activity in a baseball game, the system first interprets that activity, generalizes from these hypothesized rules, and finally accepts or rejects these rules based on their predictive utility.
 Rules for concepts like "out", "hit", "single" are learned.
 2.
 CEG generates an example to meet posted desiderata by modifying known examples from its knowledge base of examples, its "Examplesspace".
 In the version of the system being used to study learning, the system possesses several operators that can modify a given feature; its task is to explore both the space of examples and the space of modification operators not only to arrive at a solution — a base example plus a sequence of modifications — but also to gain experience in using the operators in order to allow later learning about the operators themselves.
 3.
 COUNT possesses a repertoire of primitive number and string manipulation routines, such as "increment by 1", "move the pointer right by 1", and control routines "repeat", and "do N times", from which it is to build procedures, i.
e.
, strings of primitives, and ultimately a "count" procedure to count the number of symbols in a string.
 The system learns by 317 solving problems posed by its user who acts as its teacher.
 3.
 Examples and Learning Each of the above three learning systems is provided experiences and examples upon which it bases its learning.
 The provider of these examples, in effect, acts as its teacher.
 BASEBALL: the ensemble of observed games CEG: the initial Examplesspace, posed problems COUNT: posed problems Thus, the systems gain experience that ranges from a set of example games, to examples and problems, to just problems.
 In each of the systems, there is a classic tradeoff between the richness and size of the initial knowledge (not only of examples) and the amount and care of search that must be made for solutions and conclusions.
 The initial knowledge is used to control the size of the search space.
 The amount of search in the system varies: BASEBALL: small CEG: smallmedium COUNT: mediumlarge Within CEG itself, for instance, the richer the initial Examplesspace, the less care was needed to explore "adequately" the space of operator sequences.
 COUNT works with very little embedded knowledge and expends a large effort in search.
 BASEBALL generates a small number of interpretations and generalizations.
 All of the systems make use of evaluation and judgement mechanisms: BASEBALL: uses a teacherspecified threshold to accept/reject hypotheses based on their predictive utility CEG: possessed by an explicit JUDGE module COUNT: performed by the system for the ultimate counting task, and by the teacher for all others The order of problems can be an important feature of the learning: BASEBALL: importance of order of observations depends on the threshold setting for accepting hypotheses as true CEG: order of problems is important when solutions are saved COUNT: order of problems is very important In all cases, when there is an ordering of problems, it is the responsibility of the teacher.
 In COUNT, the order of problems is critical; if COUNT is overfaced with too hard a problem, it will exceed its search tolerance without finding a solution.
 The art in teaching COUNT is selection of a sequence of problems that challenge it enough to learn things it couldn't do before but not to ask it to make too large a leap in one problem.
 BASEBALL is sensitive to ordering if the hypothesis acceptance threshold is set low; early acceptance of a mistaken hypothesis can cause difficulties in subsequent interpretation and generalization.
 H.
 General Issues in Learning Thus, we see that learning systems in addition to requiring various submodules [Smith et al 1977] can be described along several dimensions.
 Some of the dimensions of this description are: 1.
 Presence of Teacher: From strongly taught systems such as COUNT, CEG systems such as BASEBALL and Lenat's.
 In the minimally taught systems, the teacher is often implicitly embodied as builtir evaluation functions, focus of attention thresholds, and heuristics.
 2.
 Richness of Experience: From systems that need a rich experience such as COUNT and CEG to those like BASEBALL and Winston's that don't.
 For the latter systems, experience is often implicity given to the system in the form of schemas and descriptors for the domain.
 The former systems can potentially deal with more diversity in their discoveries, although they might not know what to do with it, while the latter have already been focused to interpret their experiences within a given framework or model.
 For these latter systems, to handle more diversity, say a Roman arch, the system needs to know when to let the model worlds bifurcate.
 3.
 Style of Learning: The styles can range from focussed to exploratory.
 When one knows something about the domain or general area in which the learning takes places one can be more focussed and directed; 318 BASEBALL knows a lot about competitive games in general and Winston's program, about the blocks world.
 They both have access to symbolic descriptions and frameworks like "action" entities and "must/must not" links.
 At the other end of the spectrum, COUNT is like a tyro just beginning to explore its world; it needs to gather lots of experience with its primitive capabilities.
 CEG is somewhere intermediate on the tyroexpert learner spectrum; it is able to harness its knowledge somewhat symbollically (by knowing links between examples and relations between procedures and features), but must still do a large amount of exploration.
 M.
 Grainsize of Knowledge: There is a spectrum of knowledge grainsize ranging from atomic primitives in COUNT, to midsize entities and relations in CEG, to larger chunks in Winston, to large frameworks in BASEBALL.
 5.
 Conclusions From our own and others' experience with learning systems, it is clear that examples and experiences play a critical role in learning.
 While the importance of examples in learning is often overlooked, the number, variety and order of examples cannot be since they so clearly influence the style and content of learning.
 In addition, while it might be fine for a system to do highlevel processing when it knows something, it might be more appropriate to rely on lowlevel processing (e.
g.
, trialanderror, successfailure correlations) when it is just beginning.
 Perhaps, such a lowlevel style is the only way for the inexperienced learner and perhaps, it is a way for him to discover larger clusters of knowledge.
 References Hawkins, D.
, "The View from Below".
 For the Learning of Mathematics.
 Volume 1, No.
 2, FLM Publishing Association, Quebec, Canada, November 1980.
 Lakatos, I.
, Proofs and Refutations.
 Cambridge University Press, London, 1976.
 Lenat, D.
 B.
, Automatic Theory Formation in Mathematics, Proceedings Fifth IJCAl, 1977.
 Rissland, E.
 L.
, Example Generation.
 Proceedings Third National Conference of the Canadian Society for Computational Studies of Intelligence, Victoria, B.
C.
, May 1980.
 ,Understanding Understanding Mathematics.
 Cognitive Science, Vol.
 2," No.
 ~57 197^^ Rissland, E.
 L.
, and E.
 of an Example M.
 Soloway, Overview Generation System.
 Proceedings First National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Stanford, August 1980.
 _, Constrained Example Generation: A Testbed for Studying Issues in Learning.
 Submitted" to Seventh IJCAI, 1981.
 Selfridge, O.
G.
, Learning to Count: How A Computer Might Do It.
 Bolt Beranek and Newman, Inc, 1979.
 Soloway, E.
 M.
, Learning = Interpretation + Generalization: A Case Study in KnowledgeDirected Learning.
 COINS Technical Report 7813, University of Massachussetts, 1978.
 Smith, R.
G.
, T.
 M.
 Mitchell, R.
 A.
 Chestek and B.
 G.
 Buchanan, "A Model for Learning Systems".
 Proceedings Fifth IJCAI, 1977.
 Winston, P.
 H.
, "Learning Structural Descriptions from Examples" in The Psychology of Computer Vision, Winston (ed), McGraw'Hill, 1975.
 319 ITntcrrupt Ion rffi'cts tn hnrkvijird pntteni m.
TskinR: Tlii' uo|;lcctrd rolp of flxntion Kt limil 1 J.
 PnscvinlLooiu', .
1.
 Johnson, D.
 Coodmnn, D.
 n.
imoliuk, nnd T.
.
 II.
 Tlicoilur Yrrk UolvorKlty.
 Toronto Visual backwnni masking occurs wlien presentation of a visual stimulus (the m.
Tsk) Impairs perception of a prior brieflypresented visual stimulus (the target)• A fixation stimulus (e.
p.
, a dot or four dots demarcatinR a square) directs the subject's attention (i.
e.
, fixation) to tlio place where tarrct and mask will appear.
 Two parameters often manipulated In backward masking; research are; onerRy properties of mask nnd target,and time lag between appearance of the target and appearance of the mask (stimulus onset asynchronySOA).
 Two sorts of explanation exist for backward masking: (1) Interruption theory (e.
g.
, Turvey, 1973; llelllge et al.
, 1979), which interprets backward masking as a timedependent central phenomenon, i.
e.
, interruption hy the mask's signal of procQssing of the target's signal; and (2) sensory Integration tlieory (e.
g.
, Felsten & Wasserman, 198(1), which posits that the mask Impairs the perception of the target by causing a peripheral or central fusion of the two sensory signals.
 We present here a series of experiments which establish the importance of a new processanalytical model of backward masking.
 The model predicts very strong and developmentally stable, heretofore unknown, effects that no available perceptual theory can explain.
 One of these effects is the role of size of the fixation stimulus in moderating the disrupting impact of the mask on recognition of the target.
 This moderating effect of size of fixation stimulus suggests the existence of contentfree central attentional processes, which regulate the influence of the mask on target recognition.
 After Piaget, we call this f ixationstimulus effect a centration effect; we describe briefly below the process theory and its taskanalytical model of backward masking that led to the prediction of this effect.
 The Theory of Constructive Operators (TCO) (PascualLeone & Goodman, 1979) formulates in functional terms the psychological processes which within the organism codetermine performance.
 These processes are of two sorts: (1) Situationspecific processes or "software" of the organism, which the theory conceptualJzes as schemes; and (2) situationfree processes or "liardware" of the psychological organism, which the theory conceptualizes as silent operators (i.
e.
, resources).
 At least four silent operators are needed tn account for cognitive performances; the L, M, I, and F operators.
 The L operator is the Logical learning operator.
 The result of L learning is the formation of habitual strtu Inros wliirh repri'icnt fri'cpKMit patterns of ronctivation .
'Jinl of co.
tppj ir.
it ion of sfhtMiies.
 I'xecutlves are L Rtructnms that represent goald irec ted generic sequences of schemes (I.
e.
, jilnns).
 In a given situation, tite (loinloant executive mobilizes tlie silent operators to produci jicrformnnce.
 The M and 7 operators represent, together, the mental effort that the organism applies on schemes to t^nmire that tiie relevant schemes will produce performance.
 The I operntor, T for interruption (hereafter called Iinterniptlon), represents the active inliibition lltnt the dcntlnnnl cxci or ive <an monitor and use to inhibit ^chewefi (Jnchtdlnfi other ronflictlnj; executives) irrelevant for its executiveplanned performance.
 The M operati>r, M for mental, is the mental attentional energy that the dominant executive mol)ili7.
es and allocates to increase the activation of (i.
e.
, boost) taskrelevant schemes.
 Attentional Menergy is a limited resource, able to boost only a small number of schemes simultaneously.
 The cardinal number of the largest set of schemes that M can boost at any one time Is called the M power, and has been shown to increase developmentally (e.
g.
, PascualLeone (.
 Goodman, 1979).
 The F operator, F for subjective/cognitive Field factor, corresponds to the tendency to structure performance in congruence with the subjectively salient structural features of the situation.
 The operative system constituted by the executives and by the M, I, and F operators, that the dominant executive monitors and allocates in any given situation, constitute the TCOmodel of the Centration Mechanism.
 Consider the general backward masking paradigm we employed: after adaptation to the fixation stimulus, one of three specified target letters Is flashed for 9 msec, the fixation stimulus reappears for 91 msec, following which a linepattern mask is presented for 50 msec Subjects must report one of the three possible targets, guessing if necessary.
 The masking effect occurs to the extent that the Orienting Reflex (OR) reaction (an innate executive) elicited by the mask 1interrupts processing of the target, thus allowing the target and mask signals to fuse.
 Recognition of the target is possible to the extent that the target executive elicited by the task Instructions (i.
e.
, "try to recognize and report the target letter") is stronger than the OR reaction so as to 1interrupt the schemes of the mask while Mboosting the schemes of the target.
 The target executive's task should he facilitated greatly if tlie target as a whole falls topographically in a retinal area whlcli is already being Mcentrated by virtue of the fixation stimulus, but should be difficult if the discriminant features of the letter fall outside the M centration.
 This is so because the discrimination among schemes which are "outside" versus "inside" the M centration is primary (perhaps innate) according to the theory; and the theory prescribes tliat tlie organism conslder;5 as relevant schemes which in the course of the task appear to be Inside N (Mboosted).
 Thus, the target executive's llnterruption of Irrelevant mask processes should he much easier to achieve if no t.
iskre) cvant scheme (no perceptual feature of the target) falls outside the M centration Initiated by the fixation stimulus.
 We modified the central backward masking paradigm by including three fixationstimulus conditions: a point fixation stimulus (a small circled dot), a snuti_rc fixation stimulus (four dots demarcating a square wliich in size covers fully the area where the targets appear), and a squarc5 fixation stimulus (a similar fourdot pattern with a fifth dot In its centre).
 Blocks of trials corresponding to the fixationstimulus conditions were presented in a withinsubject design.
 Since the square fixation will lead the subject to Mcentrate the entire area in which the target will appear and the point will lend him to Mcentrate only a portion of that area, we predict that the masking effect will be stronger in the point condition.
 Vlith the square5 fixation, subjects may look at either the square dots or the central point and, thvis, squarc5 performance should be between the other two.
 A detailed task analysts of backward masking suggests that an >\ yiower (Wp") ai evU (,ê  lot t\\e.
 e«.
ecutive's Mboost> sVvould sviHice to \\;vt\i\e t\\e X.
a?iV easily, provided that the target executive is given sufficient processing time.
 Much experimentaldevelopmental work (e.
g.
, PascualLeone f.
 Goodman, 1979) has demonstrated that Mp e+A is not available till 910 years of age.
 Thus, we predict that 910 year olds should perform better than younger subjects and that older subjects will not perform better than 910's.
 This age effect should occur when sufficient targetprocessing time is allowed (Experiments 3A and 3C below), but may not ap320 http://ir.
itpear wlien targetprocessing time Is decreased (Experiments 1, 2 and 3B).
 We also predict a main effect for cognitive style field dependence/independence.
 Field dependent (FD) subjects should experience stronger masking effects becnuse of their strong field (F) factor which will lead them to fuse tlir target and mask, and thjlr weak Ilnterruption ability (PascualI.
eone i Goodman, 1979).
 Field independents (FI) with their strong Iinterruptlon ability should perform best, with field mediums (FM) performing in between.
 Since the cognitive style effect con manifest itself only if tl\e subject is not hindered by Insufficient Mp, wo make this prediction only for adults and 11 .
ind 12year olds.
 In addition, un predict that the squarepoint performance disparity will be grente.
l for Fi (or FM in diildren) suhjects beratipe their greater Ii nl errupt ion nbilitv will ennlile them to best take adv.
iutagc of the facilitnling square.
 To test our model we conducted a scries of studies.
 General Method Subjects were grouptested with measures of field dL'pendence/1 ndependence (('111) and selrrtod across the full FDl continuum.
 Chllilri'n wen also lestetl with a Kr<Hip me.
isure i>f M powtM".
 The tnchislDsi opii .
11 lypresoiited stimuli were prepared on while cards.
 Two types of fixation stimulus were prepared: the pruxiL fixation, I.
e.
, a red dot in the centre of I he card with n small green circle handdrawn around it (.
2'> visual angle);and the sqii.
ire fixation, i.
u.
, four black dots (.
15 each) arranged in a stiuareshaped pattern (0.
9 x 0.
9 ) around the centre nf the card.
 The target stimuli (the Ceotype black letters A, T, and U 0.
9" high x 0.
?" wide) fell within the fixation area defined by the s(|uare pattern.
 The mask stimulus, a variant of Turvey's (1973) pattern ma.
sk, was made of black lines the same width as tlie target letter lines (0.
2°  wide).
 The subject's task was to indicate which of the three specified target letters had been presented on a given trial (guessing if necessary).
 On each trial the subject attended to a fixation stimulus, then a target letter was presented followed by the fixation again (or blank field for adults) and then the pattern mask.
 The subject responded after the mask went off.
 The experiments were run in blocks of fixation conditions with la trials per block.
 Within a block each target letter was presented six times in random order.
 Experiment I Method.
 Three age samples of 20 children each were selected; mean ages were B;0, 10;0, and 11;10.
 A threefield tachistoscnpc was used; the fields were set to equal luminance by visual estimation.
 On each trial .
i fixation stimulus was followed by a target letter exposed for 9 msec, then the fixation for 71 msec.
, then the mask for 50 msec.
 (80 msec.
 SOA) .
 i'.
ich rondltloii h.
id three introductory trials using lOOx, Klx, and \x the standard target duration.
 There were four blocks of 18 trials each.
 The fixed order of blocks was: £q̂ l_nĵ , sq̂ iâ rc , point, square.
 Kesults.
 An .
'ige X order x fixation ANOVA on the number of correct responses yielded a pigniflcant main effect for fix.
p ion (F(l,57) «").
R7, P <.
01), with better perfonnance In the square condition (M=15.
1) than In the point conilillon (M=11.
7).
 A sigiil f ti ant circliT x fix.
illon interictlon (1(1,')7) 5.
̂ .
7, p < .
OS) reflected an increase it) perforniaiKe from I he first to the second poicit block.
 I.
iih sq^uar^ block showed significantly liî ;lier perform:ince th.
in either piMnt block.
 To illustrate the pojjit versus square performance disparity.
 Figure I shows mean performance in the four fixation blocks for F.
xperiments 1 and 2 (to be discussed below).
 The same general pattern shown here was found in all experiments.
 H O Ul a: o < 16 14 12 10 a ' • Kxperiment 1 X « lixperiinent 2 f rniNT SQUARE POINT SQUAKF.
 (1) (1) (2) (2) FIXATION (ORDER) Figure 1, Mean performance across fixation blocks In Experiments 1 and 2, Experiment 2 3 '• ' Me^thod[.
 Three age samples were selected; mean ages" (and n's) vjere 7;4 (15), 9;4 (18), and 11;4 (15).
 Procedures were identical to Experiment 1.
 Results.
 An age x order x fixation ANOVA yielded a main effect for fixation (F(1,45)=74.
11, H •=.
01); again performance with the square (M=12.
1) was superior to that with the point (M=a.
5).
 See Figure 1.
 Experiment 3 Method.
 Seven I.
Q.
normal agegroup samples were selected; mean ages (and n's) were 6;3 (21), 7;/.
 (24), 8;4 (24), 9;6 (20), 10;4 (25), ll;4 (23), and I2;6 (24).
 A threefield tachistoscope was used: its fields were set at a luminance of 6.
5 cd/m .
 Introduction and fixationblock order were the same as in Experiments 1 and 2.
 The 6 to 8year ago samples were initially tested (treatment condition 3A) as follovjs: fixation stimulus, target for 9 msec, fixation for 91 msec, then mask for 50 msec (SOA=100 m s e c ) .
 The 9 to 12year age samples were initially tested (treatment condition 3B) as follows: fixation, target for 7 msec, fixation for 93 msec, then mask for 50 msec.
 (S0A=100 msec).
 Weeks after initial testing, the samples of 8 to 12 years were retested (treatment condition 3C),under the conditions 3A given above.
 Results.
 The three treatment conditions are presented siiccess i vel y .
 )A (9 msec, tar^'.
et).
 An age x order x fixation ANOVA yielded a significant main effect for fixatiiin (1(1,66) = 66.
2, £ < .
01); performance with the square (M=9.
4) was better than that with the pj2̂iji_t (M=6.
9).
 Other significant effects were for age (F(2.
66) 3.
7, ji < .
05), with 6yearolds doing less well than older subjects; and age X order (K(2,66) 3.
7, p < .
05), with older subjects generally Improving with practice (l.
u.
, over blocks) more than 6yearolds.
 3B_(_7_msec^^arget) .
 The ANOVA yielded a 321 http://ma.
skslRnlflcant mnln effect tor fIxntJon (F(1,8B) • 40,S, J) < ,01); performance wns better with the s<;i>are (M=8,8) than with the ^^^t^ (M=7,0).
 There w.
ns an order x fixation tnteraf t tm (F(l ,88) 9.
5, i> < ,01), with porform.
Tnce decreasing from first to serond squnrc present at Ion; still, each sqn.
ire block w.
TS s 1 p.
ni f Icantl y easier than either point block.
 3C (9 msec, target, retest), The ANOVA yielded .
iRaln a siRolficant main effect for fixation (K(l, 111) l',5.
P, p < ,01); s<̂ iiare performance (M=11,A) was better tlian JH)Jiit performance (H=8,7), Ihere were significant effects for age (F(4,lll) = 4.
08, £ < ,01), order x fixation (Fd.
lll) = 3.
93, £ < ,05), and age x order X fixation (F(4,lll) 2,98, £ < ,05).
 Overall performance peaked at 9 and 10 years followed by a dropplngoff at 11 and 12 years.
 The order x fixation Interaction rested on Increased performance in the point condition from first to second presentation.
 We will not discuss the threeway interaction, but must emphasize that for all ages except 11 years, each square block was significantly easier than either point block.
 To test style predictions, 11 .
ind 12yearolds in 3C were divided into FD, FM, and FI groups using scores on a group version of the Children's Embedded Figures Test (CEFT  Karp i Konstadt, 1963).
 An age x style x order x fixation ANOVA yielded (among other significant effects) a main effect for style (F(2,41) 11.
49, £ < ,01), with FI's and FM's performing better than FD's; and a style X fixation Interaction (F(2,41) = 4,17, £ < ,05), with disparity between FM and FD performance greater with the square than with the point.
 Pearson r;'s between CEFT and mean performance were r(21) = .
41, £ = .
05 for ll's and r(22) = .
60, £ = .
002 for 12's.
 Experiment 4 Method.
 Thirty university undergraduates were selected to form FD, FM, and FI cognitive style groups (n 10 in each), using scores on the Group Embedded Figures Test (CEFT  Oltman, et al.
, 1971).
 A fourfield tachlstoscope was used.
 Fixation was followed by a target stimulus of 7 msec, duration, then a 0.
1 cd/m'^ fullfield illumination for 93 m s e c , and then the pattern mask for 50 msec.
 (SOA 100 m s e c ) .
 All fields, except for the interstlmulus Interval, were set at a luminance of 6.
5 cd/m? In addition to the square and point fixations employed in the previous experiments, a square5 fixation was used.
 The square5 was like the square, but with an additional dot (.
15° ) in the centre of the visual field (I.
e.
, in the centre of the square)• Again each fixation condition was run wlthInsuhjects In two blocks of 18 trials each.
 A training block of 18 trials preceded the experimental fixation conditions; for the training lilock the fixation stimulus wns an "x" rxnctly half the size of the square.
 The ordir of fix.
itlnn b h u k s w.
is: i f.
i In I ii|',.
 Mi^iare, •'["j'/.
'.
"''• it"''" ̂ .
̂'P'i.
'l̂ .
 squ.
ire5, |iiilnt.
 "il̂ 'JlL*? ^ M y l e X order x fixation ANOVA yielded significant main effects for style (I(2,27) 7.
77, p .
01) and fixation (K(2,54) 18.
90, £ < .
01).
 Recognition Inrre.
i'.
cd with degree of field Indep«'iulenrc, and tlerreased from the square (M=K.
5) to the squnrc5 (M=7.
0) to the point (M=6.
0) conditions.
 The Pearson r(28) between ''̂ FlT and mean performance was .
57, p .
Oni.
 Ilioii W.
1.
 .
1 sli;n I r iiinl style x fixation Interacllciii (i:(4,54) 2.
89, p v 05) which Is plotlcd In Fl)'.
iire 2.
 This interaction sliows w 1/1 § (1.
 to u a: o o o z z 16 14 12 10 « Field Independent • Field Medium » Field Dependent SQUARE SqUARE5 POINT FIXATION Figure 2.
 Mean performance by cognitive style and fixation in Experiment 4.
 that the facilitating effect of the square fixation relative to the squaro5 and point is greatest for FI subjects, and tlie misleading effect of the point f 'xatlon is greatest for FD subjects.
 Note tliat as the theory predicts, FM subjects perform between FI and FD subjects, and performance with the square5 falls between that with the square and the point fixations.
 References Felsten, G.
, and Uasserman, G.
 S.
 Visual masking: Mechanisms and theories.
 Psychological Bulletin, 1980, 88, 329353.
 Hellipe, J, B.
, Walsh, D.
 A,, Lawrence, V.
 W.
, and Prasse, M.
 Flgural relationship effects and mechanisms of visual masking.
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 1979, 5, 88100.
 Karp, S.
 A.
, and Konstadt, N.
 L.
 Manual for the Children's Embedded Figures Test.
 Cognitive Tests, P.
O.
 Box 4, Vanderveer Station, Brooklyn, New York, 1963, Oltman, P, K,, Raskin, E.
, and Witkln, H.
 A.
 Group Embedded Figures Test.
 Palo Alto, Calif.
: ConsuTtlng Psychologists Press, 1971.
 PascualLeone, J.
, and Crfiodman, D.
 Intelligence and experience: A neoPiagetlan approach.
 Instructional Science, 1979, 8, 301367.
 Turvey, M.
 T.
 On peripheral and central processes In vision: Inferences from an informationprocessing analysis of masking with pattern stimuli.
 Psychological Review, 1973, 80, 152.
 322 COGNITIVE LOAD AFFECTS EARLY BRAIN POTENTIAL INDICATORS OF PERCEPTUAL PROCESSING Francois Richer and Jackson Beatty Department of Psychology University of California, Los Angeles Los Anqeles, California 90024 A major problem in cognitive psychology is the determination of the effects of primary tasks on concurrent processing of other information.
 Cerebral eventrelated potentials (ERPs) offer one approach to this problem by examining the influence of taskinduced cognitive load on discrete brain events related to the processing of stimuli.
 In dual task situations, the introduction of tasks such as discrimination or problem solving has been found to attenuate various components of the ERP to stimuli in the secondary task (Defayolle, Dinand, ft Gentil, 1971; Lille, Audin, K Hazemann, 1975).
 Systematic manipulations of processing demands were studied by Isreal, Wickens, Chesney, and Donchin (1980) who report an attenuation effect on the P300 component of the ERP with increasing display load in a tracking task, where workload was also assessed with a secondary reaction time task.
 * In a dual task the ERPeliciting stimulus is generally relevant to a task and conseguently has to be processed at a relatively high level which precludes the observation of the effects of cognitive load on earlier stages of stimulus processing.
 The present study was undertaken to observe the effects of cognitive load on taskirrelevant stimuli using pupil size as an independent measure of processing demands during problem solving (see Reatty, 1979).
 ERPs were obtained to irrelevant auditory probes presented before and after the presentation of digits in a mental multiplication task.
 This task has been shown to produce pupillary dilations with a peak amplitude that is monotonical ly related to the a priori difficulty of the problems (Hess «.
 Polt, 1961; Payne, Parry, & Harasymiw, 1968).
 Method Subjects and Material Eleven col lege level students of both sexes were used in the experiment.
 The EEG and vertical electrooculogram (EGG) were recorded with AgAgCl electrodes placed at Fz, Cz, Pz, F3, F4, P3, PI, referred to linked ear lobes and for the EGG from electrodes placed above and below the right eye.
 All signals were amplified by Grass series 8 amplifiers with a 0.
1 to 70 Hz bandpass.
 Pupillary diameter was measured using a Whittaker 1050S video pupi)lomoter.
 Data collection and stimulation was controlled by a PnP11/34 computer.
 All signals were sampled at POO Hz for one second starting 60 msecs prior to stimulation and were digitized online at 12 hits.
 Digitized singletrial data were stored on magnetic tape for later analysis.
 The auditory prompts and digits were presented through digitized speech and had a duration of 0.
6 sees.
 The irrelevant stimuli consisted of 1000 Hz tones presented at an intensity of approximately 56 dB SL with a duration of 20 msecs.
 The tones were generated by a HewlettPackard audio oscillator (model 200 AB' and delivered through a loudspeaker 1.
5 m in front of the subject.
 Subjects had access to a keyboard to start the trials and enter their answers on every trial.
 Procedure After the electrode placement, the subject was told that he would be required to solve 30 easy and 30 difficult multiplication problems in a random sequence.
 Problems were called easy when both numbers were between 2 and 9 and difficult when one number was between 3 and 9 and the other was between 13 and 19.
 The procedure for each trial, as described to the subject was as follows.
 The subject heard the word "Ready" through the loudspeaker at which time he was to fixate a dot in front of him and depress a key to start the trial.
 He was then to attend to the auditory presentation of the two digits separated by a onesecond pause and to ignore all other stimuli.
 After the second digit the subject was to silently multiply the two digits until he heard the word "Respond", at which time he could stop fixating and was to enter the correct answer on the keyboard.
 A tone was presented at a random time between one and two seconds after the subject's initiation of the trial and also between one and two seconds after the presentation of the last digit.
 The interval between the end of the last digit and the response cue varied between 3.
5 and 4.
5 sees.
 Results For each subject, the individual EEG epochs v;ere edited for artifacts using an RMS voltage criterion rejecting an average of 10% of the trials.
 The epochs were then averaged separately for each of tlie four conditions defined by the two recording periods and the two difficulty levels.
 Averaged pupillary responses were also obtained usino the same trials.
 Three of the initial eleven subjects had to be excluded from the analysis because their EEG records contained a large amount of ocular artifacts.
 Two main components could be identified in all the averaged waveforms by visual inspection: a neoative one having a latency ranging from P.
O to 130 msecs (Mion) and a positive one with a latency range of 170 to 220 msecs (P200).
 Group averages were obtained (see Figure 1) for tlie four conditions and difference waveforms were computed between EPPs in baseline and problem solvinn periods.
 Slow potential shifts could not be discerned in any of the difference waveforms.
 The peak amplitude of the components relative to an averane prestimulus baseline was obtained usinn the raxinum value within the latency ranges dpscribod <ihnve.
 At Fz, rilOO amplitude was found to he generally lower during problem solving periods than during baseline periods (Fl,7)=11.
7, p .
01).
 323 At Cz the mean baseline amplitude was slightly hiqher for the difficult condition compared to the easy condition but a much lower amplitude was observed in the difficult condition during the task compared to the other three conditions.
 Significant effects were obtained for the main effect of task presence (F(l,7)=9.
36, p .
05) and for the interaction between task presence and difficulty level (F(l,7)=5.
fi6, p .
05).
 An analysis of the simple effects in this interaction revealed that task presence produced a significant amplitude decrement on NlOO only in the difficult condition (F(l,7)=10.
8, p .
0?5) and not in the easy condition (F 1).
 No significant effects were observed on the NlOO component at any other derivation and no effects were found on the amplitude of P200 at any electrode site.
 Average pupil size at stimulus onset was also analyzed using ANOVA and significant effects were obtained for the level of difficulty (F(l,7)=6.
17, p .
05) and for the interaction between task presence and difficulty level (F(l,7)=38.
27, p .
01).
 Analyses of simple effects determined that, as with MlOO amplitide, the effect of the task on pupil diameter was only significant in the difficult condition (F(l,7)=3.
4, p .
0?5).
 Figure ? contrasts the effects obtained on pupil size and on NlOO amplitude at Cz.
 In order to examine the relation between the effects observed on the pupil and NlOO measures across subjects rank correlations were obtained between the changes in pupil size and in NlOO amplitude from baseline to task periods across subjects for both the easy and difficult conditions.
 A significant negative correlation was obtained in the easy condition (p=0.
77, p .
05) but not in the difficult condition (p=0.
22, N.
S.
).
 Discussion The present data suggest that the amplitude of the NlOO component evoked by irrelevant stimuli can be affected by cognitive load as indexed by pupillary measures.
 The fact that no NlOO attenuation could be observed in the easy trials arnues against an interpretation of the results in terms of a general activation effect due to the performance of a task.
 The same argument can he used to refute significant effects due to the long recovery period of NlOO with multiple stimulation, and significant contamination due to response preparation or CNVlike potentials.
 Multiplication problems involving single digit pairs have been shown to produce identifiable pupillary dilations in other studies (e.
g.
, Hess !.
 Polt, 1964) but in the present experiment the second probe was presented rather late after the last digit and, on most trials, probably occurred after the resolution of the pupillary response.
 The absence of slow potential shifts in the global difference waveforms is not sufficient to conclude that the fIlOO attenuation is not due to variations in 'overlapping potential shifts.
 It is clear however, that the influence of the task on the ERP takes place at an early stage.
 Indeed, the NlOO component has been shown to be closely associated with processes related to the early perceptual strength of stimuli indexed by sensitivty measures in signal detection situations (e.
g.
.
 Squires, Hillyard, ft Lindsay, 1973) and intensity parameters in multichannel selective listening situations (Schwent, Hillyard, I Galambos, 1976).
 The finding that the cognitive load induced by problem solving can affect CNS activity at latencies similar to those of processes related to the strength of physioloqical signals can have an important impact on conceptualizations of information processing.
 These suggestive results will have to be complemented by more direct observations to establish the nature of this possible influence of problem solving on early stages of perceptual processing.
 References Beatty, J.
 Pupillometric methods of workload evaluation: Present status and future possibilities.
 In B.
O.
 Hartman, f, R.
E.
 McKenzie (Eds.
), Survey of methods to assess workload.
 London: AGARD (AG No.
 246T7 1979.
 Defayolle, M.
, Dinand, J.
P.
, & Gentil, M.
T.
 Averaged evoked potentials in relation to attitude, mental load and intelligence.
 In W.
T.
 Singleton, J.
G.
 Fox, R D.
 Whitfield (Eds.
), Measurement of man at work.
 London: Taylor and Francis, T97TT~ Hess, E.
H.
, K Polt, vl.
H.
 Pupil size in relation to mental activity during simple problem solving.
 Science, 1964, M S , 1190119?.
 Isreal, J.
R.
, Wickens, C.
D.
, Chesney, G.
L.
, S.
 Donchin, E.
 The eventrelated brain potential as an index of displaymonitoring workload.
 Human Factors.
 1900, 22, 211224.
 .
 Lille, F.
, Audin, G.
, ^ TTazemann, P.
 Effects of time and tasks upon auditory and somatosensory evoked potentials in man.
 Electroencephalography i Clinical Neurophysiology, 1975, 39, 239246.
 Payne, D.
T.
, Parry, M.
E.
, & Harasymiw, S.
J.
 Percentage pupillary dilation as a measure of item difficulty.
 Perception I Psychophysics, 1"68, 4, 139143.
 Schwent, V.
L.
, Hillyard, S.
A.
, S, Galambos, R.
 Selective attention and the auditory vertex potential.
 II.
Effects of signal intensity and masking noise.
 Electroencephalography K Clinical Neurophysiology, 1976b, 40, 615622.
 Squires, K.
C.
, Hillyard, S.
A.
, R ITndsay, P.
H.
 Vertex potentials evoked during auditory signal detection: Relation to decision criteria.
 Perception h Psychophysics, 1973, 14, 265272.
 324 easy N I O O difficult T + 5|jV O 3 a.
 Z < PUPIL basei me task Figure 1.
 Group average waveforms for the two experimental conditions obtained to stimuli during baseline (solid) and problem solving (dotted) periods.
 difficult easy Figure 2.
 *̂e«n amplitudes of NIOO and mean pupil diameters in the four conditions.
 325 THE SPATIAL REPRESENTATION AND PROCESSING OF INFORMATION IN COGNITION" by Gary W.
 Strong and Bruce A.
 Whitehead' Objects spatial patterns within them, and spatial patterns among them form the concrete structure of our world, and intelligent action in it depends upon such spatially patterned information [ 1 ] .
 Therefore, it is important to define the pattern in the internal of the environment and in applied to this internal role of spatial representation the processing representation.
 The premise o spatial pattern of shows regularities information content.
 stimulus properties demonstrated (invariances) and po as the basis of an strategy.
 We ha feasibility of s simulating a propos mechan i sm.
 f our model is that the realworld information independent of its Extensive analysis of [25] have indeed such regularities inted out their value information processing ve investigated the uch a strategy by ed cognitive operator Our model postulates an internal space image which represents the spatial pattern, but not content, of environmental stimulus information.
 (The properties of this internal space image correspond to those of the parietal cortex in the brain.
) Cognitive operations upon this internal space correspond to transformations in realworld spatial pattern.
 As hypothesized in the information processing principles below, the cognitive operator serves a dual role: It represents a generic which transforms the incoming information, out the corresponding on the spatial pattern space image.
 In this realworld action spatial pattern of and it carries cognitive operation of the internal latter role, the cognitive operator tracks or predicts the spatial transformation of the environmental stimulus which will result from the realworld action.
 Our model is respect to brain s specific problem attention over t enhancement effec been put forth as cognitive operati model such as our neural mechanisms, be neurally feas with the neural da "Physiological Con highly s tructure a doma i n: he visual t in pari a subst on.
 Whil s cannot it can be ible and t ta, as d straints implified nd limited the moveme field.
 etal corte rate for e a cogn show det const rain o be con si i scussed below.
 with to a nt of The X has this i t i ve ailed ed to stent under 'This research supported in part by National Science Foundation Grant No.
 IST8011617.
 'Systems Science Institute, University of Louisville, Louisville KY 40292 Hypothesized Information Processing Principles The simulation model implements hypothesized principles by which neural interconnection structure represents spatial pattern information about the environment.
 Content representations are modeled only as they participate in the control of the spatial processing system.
 More precisely, distributed processing of spatial information is influenced by associations between the spatial and the figural representation systems.
 The role of figural representations in the model is restricted to the effect of their associative connections to spatial patterns.
 This effect is hypothesized to serve as a control mechanism for distributed processing by spatial operators, according to the principles below: (a).
 The cognitive operator must both represent a transformation of space and carry out such a transformation upon object information.
 (b).
 Control of processing must be distributed among contentaddressable representations of spatial operators.
 Content addressability is achieved through associative connections to figural representations.
 (c).
 Content representations must preserve identity across change of spatial locus.
 (d).
 The cognitive carry out independently Principles ( developed in prev access to the representat ion addressabi1i ty.
 addressabi1i ty competition amon themselves acting processors.
 This centralized cont processing network operator must be able to spatial transformations of object content.
 a) and (b) have been ious work [6].
 Efficient information in a requires contentHowever, this content can be achieved by g the representations as independent, parallel avoids the need for rol of the distributed Physiological Constraints The cortex is the spa attent ion mechani sm which (i transforma produces i (the parie (i i i ) mov attention.
 cortex mechan i sm.
 consistent without a complete.
 enhancement effec a neurophysiologic tial locus of over the visual fi has previously ) carries out tion (Principle ts neurophysiolog tal enhancement ef es the psycholog A model based implements our The model is d with neurophys ttempting to be t in parietal al correlate of psychological eld [79).
 No been put forth the spatial a above), (ii) ical correlate feet) , and thus ical locus of upon parietal hypothesized esigned to be iological data anatomically Parietal cell recording studies [78] demonstrate internal representations where the spatial layout in the neural tissue represents that in the environment.
 The anatomical coordinate system is in this sense an image of the surrounding 326 environmental space.
 In the present model, it is termed the INTERNAL SPACE IMAGE.
' Enhancement in the response of parietal cells to a peripheral stimulus has been shown to (e).
 Correspond to the environmental locus of the target stimulus [78].
 (f).
 Correspond to a psychological locus of attention (Jonides' [10] "mind's eye") directed toward the stimulus [78].
 (g).
 Precede not only a saccadic eye movement to the stimulus, but also a reaching hand movement to it [8], or even the directing of attention to the stimulus without making eye, hand, or other movements to it [89].
 In sum, while neural enhancement encodes the spatial locus of an impending attentional shift, it does not depend upon the motor characteristics of the shift.
 Parietal enhancement is therefore associated with a more general spatial transformation than the enhancement effect in superior colliculus which is rigidly tied to eye movement shifts [9].
 Resulting Model Specifications It would seem enhancement mentioned a some way to produce percept by emphasizing which is to become the or attentional shift.
 usual case where the pe quickly brought to the of enhancement at the neural locus is unclea model seeks to clarify peripheral enhancement SET OF 3FATIAL TRANSFORr/lATIONS that the parietal bove should help in a more functional retinal information target of a movement However, in the ripheral stimulus is fovea, the function original peripheral r.
 The simulation the function of this as follows: INTERNAL SFACE n"AGE FIGURE 1: THE REPRESENTATION OF A TRANSFORMATION In a system which represents transformations, representation of the magnitude and direction of the shift is essential.
 This information is defined by the enhanced peripheral locus (point p in Figure 1) in combination with the fovea (point q in Figure 1).
 Therefore, the function of such peripheral enhancement may be to encode such a vector in the parietal representation of space.
 The peripheral enhancement would then indicate the activation of the encoded vector.
 The Hypothesized Information Processing Principles (ad) and Physiological Constraints (eg) above imply these model specifications: (i: (2), A fundamental transformation mechanism exists as shown in Figure 1 (discussed above).
 Figural content of from its spatial (Constraints c and d).
 spatial locus of input the internal space image e).
 Therefore, figural input can affect the internal space image only in the selection of spatial transformat ions.
 input is sefjarated locus inft ""mation Only the is passed to (Constraint content of (3).
 Information representing spatial locus in the environment is coded by activity at corresponding loci in the internal space image (Constraint e).
 The figural identity of active loci in the internal space image must be represented elsewhere in the system (Constraints c and d).
 Since control of processing must be distributed among contentaddressable representations (Constraint b), control must originate outside the internal space image.
 (6).
 Therefore, the spatial transformations which act upon the internal space image must be selected by their associations to content representations (Constraint a).
 (4).
 (5), By decomposing into its spatial a (Principle d leading 2), each componen generalizable.
 A therefore be separate spatial representat different figural con representations lea spatial context.
 stimulus information nd figural components to Model Specification t is independently new stimulus can ly matched with (i) ions learned in a text and (ii) figural rned in a different processing spec i f ically, the spatial appropriate The remaining point to be addressed in the model is the control of distributed (Princ iple b).
 More only one of the operators in transformation set will be for a given stimulus.
 Selection of this operator must depend upon both spatial and figural properties of the stimulus.
 This selection process therefore requires reconvergence of the spatial and figural components of stimulus information.
 Appropriate spatial operators are addressed via convergent association with active figural representations.
 This associative contentaddressing serves as the control mechanism for the distributed processing network (Model Specifications 5 and 6).
 ' "Image" is used here in the sense of a mathematical function from external to internal coordinate systems.
 327 The Model Structure As described above, the model operates by initial decomposition of incoming stimulus information into generic spatial and figural components and subsequent association of these components.
 A model structure which illustrates this and which also satisfies Model Specifications 16 is shown in Figure 2.
 Perceptual input arrives at the circle labelled LOCUSDEPENDENT FEATURES.
 Its feature content information is picked up by LOCUSINDEPENDENT FEATURES, while the spatial locus of each input feature is simply mapped onetoone onto a corresponding "hotspot" within the INTERNAL SPACE IMAGE.
 The locus of the "hotspot" in the INTERNAL SPACE IMAGE therefore represents the spatial position of the feature, but does not carry any content However, each "hotspot" set of affordances (movement by virtue of the fact that LOCUSDEPENDENT OPERATORS in transformation set may the locus occupied by the Each of these LOCUSDEPENDENT represents a specific, local information.
 activates a possibilities one or more the spatial originate at "hotspot" OPERATORS transformation in the INTERNAL SPACE IMAGE.
 At any one time, numerous, conflicting possible transformations may be suggested by the current set of "hotspots" in the INTERNAL SPACE IMAGE.
 The selection of an appropriate, consistent set of transformations for the model to carry out requires the convergence of activation from two different pathways: (1) from active LOCUSINDEPENDENT FEATURES, through the (learned) ASSOCIATION NETWORK, into LOCUSINDEPENDENT OPERATORS; and (2) from the set of possible transformations (affordances as defined above) given by the current analysis of the INTERNAL SPACE IMAGE, into LOCUSINDEPENDENT OPERATORS.
 Thus activation from two pathways converges into the set of LOCUSINDEPENDENT OPERATORS .
 Any such operator receiving simultaneous activation from both pathways represents a transformation that is suitable to perform, given both the spatial and content limitations of the environment.
 At this point, the operator selected by convergent activation may in turn activate its associated LOCUSDEPENDENT OPERATORS, leading to actual behavior as well as to a prediction of the next internal space layout.
 This implemented program.
 recognition but also f appropriate successful within obj underway to generalizat i plan to ada chess, which program) the ef f ic iently informal ion model str and tested The model of spatially illin of places, encoding of ects.
 Fur examine i ons from per pt the model might simul ability of process in parallel.
 ucture has been in a computer exhibits not only patterned objects missing features in suggesting the pattern information ther testing is ts ability to form ceptual input.
 We to a game, such as ate (in a serial neural circuitry to spatiallyencoded ASSOCIATION NETWORK LOCUSINDEPENDENT OPERATORS LOCUSINDEPENDENT FEATURES LOCUSDEPENDENT OPERATOR LOCUSDEPENDENT FEATURES INTERNAL SPACE IMAGE FIGURE 2i THE MODEL STRUCTURE The important features of the model are that it encodes spatial pattern within a nonspatial association network, thereby eliminating the necessity of storing a "picture".
 Instead a network of stored featuremovement relations is sufficient to reconstruct the picture whenever necessary.
 Thus the model deals with the relational aspect of information as well as the bitcontent aspect.
 Each featuremovement relation can be used not only to reconstruct the image of the perceived object but also to evoke behavior appropriate to the object.
 Finally, the model structure described can be translated into other domains requiring goaldirected information processing, such as in cultural systems [11].
 REFERENCES Posner, M.
I.
, Nissen, M.
J.
, W.
C.
 Attended and processing modes: The role spatial location.
 In H.
L.
 E.
 Saltzman (Eds.
), Perceiving and Processing Information, Hillsdale, N.
J.
: Earlbaum, 1978.
 and Ogden, unattended of set for Pick and Modes of 328 2.
 Gibson, J.
J.
 The Perception of the Visual World.
 Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1950.
 ^,j, 3.
 Gibson, J.
J.
 An Ecological Approach to Visual Perception.
 Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1979.
 4.
 Lee, D.
N.
 Visual information during locomotion.
 In R.
B.
 MacLeod & H.
L.
 Pick (Eds.
), Perception: Essays in Honor of James J.
 Gibson.
 Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1974.
 5.
 Shaw, R.
 i, Pittenger, J.
 Perceiving change.
 In H.
L.
 Pick, Jr.
 & E.
 Saltzman (Eds.
), Modes of Perceiving and Processing Information.
 Hillsdale, N.
J.
: Lawrence Earlbaum, 1978.
 6.
 Whitehead, B.
A.
 A Neural Model of Human Pattern Recognition.
 New York: Garland, in press.
 7.
 Yin, T.
C.
 and Mountcastle, V.
B.
 Visual input to the visuomotor mechanisms of the monkey's parietal lobe.
 Science, 1977, 197, 13811383.
 8.
 Robinson, D.
L.
, Goldberg, M.
E.
, and Stanton, G.
B.
 Parietal association area in the primate: sensory mechanisms and behavioral modulations.
 Journal of Neurophysiology, 1978, 41, 910932.
 9.
 Robinson, D.
L.
, S.
 Goldberg, M.
E.
 The visual substrate of eye movements.
 In J.
W.
 Senders, D.
F.
 Fisher, (, R.
A.
 Monty (Eds.
), Eye Movements and the Higher PsychologicaT Functions.
 HlTlsdale, N.
J.
: Earlbaum, 1978.
 10.
 Jonides, J.
 Voluntary Versus Reflexive Control of the Mind's Eye's Movement.
 Paper presented to the Psychonomic Society, November 1976.
 11.
 Strong, G.
W.
 Information, Pattern, and Behavior: The Cognitive Biases of Four Japanese Groups.
 Ph.
D.
 Dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 1981.
 329 